8168
1. For NPA, the approach may not be aligned with the runway center line. When is a straight-in approach considered acceptable?
It can be considered a straight in approach if the final approach track and the runway center line are within 30º or less of each other.

2. What is the course of action if during a holding procedure, the limiting radial is reached before the limiting DME distance?
The limiting radial should be followed until the turn to the inbound. The turn should be initiated at latest where the DME distance is reached

3. What characterizes the buffer area?
The buffer area extends 5NM beyond the boundary of the holding area and takes into consideration the obstacles and terrain in that protected area.

4. What is the minimum holding level?
The minimum holding level provides a minimum obstacle clearance of at least 300m (1000ft) in the holding area and a minimum obstacle clearance in the buffer area of at least 60m (200ft). Holdings in mountainous areas should be made at least at 600 m (2000ft), having in consideration the possible effect of turbulence.

5. What are the three techniques for vertical path control on NPA?
a) continuous descent final approach (CDFA); b) constant angle descent; c) step down approach.

6. In case of a missed approach, when can the turning portion of the procedure start?
In the event of a missed approach the lateral “turning” portion of the missed approach procedure shall not be executed prior to the MAPt.

7. What is the difference between MDH and MDA?
The MDH is referenced to aerodrome elevation where in the MDA is reference to mean sea level.

8. What must be ensured before leaving the visual maneuvering area(circling)?
The airplane should make sure that is established on the appropriate missed approach procedure or at the minimum sector altitude(MSA)

9. What is the top speed in a holding pattern below 14000ft?
The top speed is 230kts, although it is limited to 170kts if the holding pattern is limited to CAT A and B aircraft only.

10. What is the meaning of a straight departure?
Is a departure in which the initial departure track is within 15 degrees of the alignment of the runway centerline.

11. On a departure, straight flight is assumed until what altitude?
Until an altitude/height of 120m (394ft)

12. When is it possible to fly above the transition level with reference to local QNH?
After the approach clearance has been given and the descent has begun, provided that level flight above the transition altitude is not anticipated.

13. What is the typical aircraft category for a small single engine airplane?
Category A: Speed at threshold (Vat) less than 91 kts; Range of final approach speeds – 70/100;

14. What is the maximum speed for a visual maneuver (circling) for CAT A aircraft?
Maximum speed is 100kts.

15. What are the two types of approach procedures?
Straight-in approaches and circling (visual maneuvering).

16. What does Vat mean?
It is the speed at threshold and is based on 1.3 times the stall speed (Vso) or 1.23 times the stall speed in landing configuration at the maximum certified landing mass (Vs1g).

17. What are the transition level and transition altitude?
The transition altitude is where the pilots change the altimeter setting from local QNH to standard pressure and is usually a fixed number. The transition level is the point where the pilots transition from standard pressure to local QNH. It is not a fixed number and is set by ATC in function current conditions and pressures.

18. What are the sectors of a holding procedure?
Parallel entry, offset (teardrop) entry and direct entry.

19. What distinguishes type A and type B approaches.
3D approach operations can be either: a) Type A with a DH of 75 m (250 ft) or above; b) Type B with a DH less than 75 m (250 ft). 2D approach operations can only be Type A with an MDH of 75 m (250 ft) or above.

20. Why can approach operations using a CDFA be considered 2D or 3D?
It is considered 2D if the descent profile is manually calculated and 3D if the descent profile is calculated by on-board equipment (baro-VNAV or SBAS).

21. What is the MAPt?
A point in an instrument approach procedure at or before which the prescribed missed approach procedure must be initiated to ensure that the minimum obstacle clearance is not infringed.

22. What is the meaning of TAA?
Terminal Arrival Altitude – Associated with PBN procedures based on the “T” or “Y” arrangement It is a radius of 25 NM around the IAF where there is an obstacle clearance of at least 1000ft.

23. What is the minimum climb gradient during the missed approach procedure?
The minimum gradient is 2.5%.

24. What are the types of final approaches?
-NPA with FAF -NPA without FAF -APV -PA

25. What is the meaning of DA/H?
A specified altitude or height in an instrument approach operation at which a missed approach must be initiated if the required visual reference to continue the approach has not been established.

26. For category A aircraft what is the maximum speed for racetrack and reversal procedures?
Maximum speed above 6000ft is 110kts and below 6000 ft is 100 kts.

27. What are the types of reversal procedures?
Procedure turn 45/180; Procedure turn 80/260; Base turn;

28. How shall we proceed during an entry in a reversal procedure?
Unless specified otherwise, reversal procedures shall be entered from a track within +/- 30º of the outbound track of the reversal procedure. For base turns, where the +/- 30° direct entry sector does not include the reciprocal of the inbound track, the entry sector is expanded to include it

29. What are the ILS operation requirements ?
ICAO Doc 8168 PANS-OPS sets out the following operational requirements regarding ILS operations : - Aircraft must remain within less than half deflection of the LOC - Must be considered established on the ILS track - Before commencing the descent on the GS - Aircraft must not deviate more than half-scale fly-up deflection below the GS in order to remain within protected airspace. If any of those parameters are exceeded a go around shall be initiated immediately.

30. Categories of Aircraft
The criteria for categories of aircraft is the Vat, IAS at Threshold. - Category A, less than 91 KIAS - Category B, 91 KIAS < Vat < 121 KIAS - Category C, 121 KIAS < Vat < 141 KIAS - Category D, 141 KIAS < Vat < 166 KIAS - Category E, 166 KIAS < Vat < 211 KIAS - Category H, refer to Helicopters However a procedure may specify a maximum KIAS regardless of categories of aircraft.

31. Obstacle Clearance Altitude/Height
OCA/H depends on the type of approach being made : - NPA → the lowest altitude or height above the elevation of the runway threshold at which a missed approach shall be initiated to comply with the appropriate obstacle clearance criteria. - PA → the lowest altitude or height above the elevation of the runway threshold (if the threshold is more than 2m/7’ below aerodrome elevation) below which an aircraft cannot descend without infringing the appropriate obstacle clearance criteria. - Circling → the lowest altitude or height above the aerodrome elevation below which an aircraft cannot descend without infringing the appropriate obstacle clearance criteria. Minimas take into account other operational factors producing MDA/H in case of a NPA and DA/H in case of a PA.

32. Approach Segments
Approach procedures are divided in 4 segments : - Initial Approach Segment : Begins at the initial approach fix (IAF) and ends at the intermediate fix (IF), the aircraft has left the en-route and manoeuvers to enter the Intermediate Approach Segment. - Intermediate Approach Segment : Aircraft speed and configuration should be adjusted to prepare the aircraft for final approach, descent gradient is kept shallow. - Final Approach Segment : Alignment and final descent for landing are made either a straight-in landing or a circling maneuver may be made. - Missed Approach Segment : Consisting also in initial, intermediate, final phases.

33. Initial Approach Segment
As mentioned above the purpose of the Initial Approach Segment is for the aircraft to maneuver to the Intermediate Approach Segment from the en-route structure. Track guidance is provided along the Initial Approach Segment with a maximum interception angle of 90° for PAs and 120° for NPAs. The MOC provided in this part of the approach is 300m (1000’) in the primary area, reducing to 0’ at the secondary area. If no IAF or IF is available for an approach a reversal procedure, racetrack or a holding pattern shall be made.

34. Intermediate Approach Segment
As mentioned the purpose of the Intermediate Approach Segment is to configure the aircraft and prepare it for the final approach. The MOC provided in this segment is 150m (492’) in the primary area, reducing to 0 at the secondary area. If a FAF is available this segment starts with the aircraft on the inbound track of the procedure turn, base turn or final inbound leg of the racetrack procedure. It ends at the FAF or FAP.

35. Final Approach Segment
As previously stated the Final Approach Segment objective is for the aircraft to align itself with the runway and start the final descent. Final Approach Segments vary with NPA with FAF, NPA without FAF, APV and PA. The segment starts at the FAF and ends at the MAPt with a distance permitting deceleration, configuration,… In a NPA the descent gradient in the final approach segment is 5.2% or 3° providing 318’/NM. A step down fix may be provided on some NPAs, in this case two OCA/H are defined : - a higher value for the primary procedure - a lower value if the step down fix is identified during the approach For NPA procedures without FAF, this procedure may be designed where the facility is both the IAF and the MAPt. Descent to MDA/H is to be made once established inbound on the final approach track.

36. Visual Maneuvering
Circling consists of the flight phase after an instrument approach bringing the aircraft into position to land on a runway not suitably located for a straight-in approach. This procedure is a visual maneuver, the visual maneuvering area is determined by arcs centered on each runway threshold establishing the OCA/H for each aircraft category. MDA/H are also specified for operational considerations a descent below MDA/H shall not be made until visual references are established, runway threshold is in sight or the obstacle clearance can be maintained and a landing with normal ROD and bank angles can be made. A prescribed track might be given where defined visual features can be determined, navigation is primarily made by visual references.

37. Continuation of the Approach
The following criterias apply for instrument approach operations Type A and CAT I Type, at least one of the references specified below shall be visible at MDA/H or DA/H : - Elements of the approach lighting system - The threshold; - The threshold markings; - The threshold lights; - The threshold identification lights; - The visual glide path indicator; - The TDZ or TDZ markings; - Other visual references may be used if they are stated in the operation manual.

38. Destination Alternate
The missed approach procedure is made to provide obstacles protection during the manoeuver, it specifies the beginning and the altitude/height where it ends. It shall be initiated either at the DA/H or at the MDA/H when visual references are not established prior to the MAPt. The MAPt may be defined by either : - the intersection of a GP with the DA/H in APV/PAs procedures - a navaid, a fix, a waypoint or a distance from the FAF in NPA procedures During a missed approach a protection against early turns is provided and the minimum climb gradient is 2.5% and may be reduced to 2.0% if safeguarding measures have been taken. For specific conditions the 2.5% gradient can’t be met such as for high gross mass, engine out, non normal configurations,… a special procedure might be provided with a potential increase in the procedures DA/H and MDA/H.

39. Missed Approach Phases
Initial Phase → This begins at the MAPt and ends at the start of climb, this phase has a high workload due to the necessity to make attitude and configuration changes. It assumes that guidance is greatly used causing this phase to allow no turns. Intermediate Phase → This phase begins at the start of climb and extends to a point where 50m (164’) obstacle clearance is maintained. The track during this phase can’t be changed more than 15° from the initial missed approach phase and assumes the aircraft starts correcting its track. Final Phase → It begins at a point where 50m (164’) obstacle clearance is maintained and goes up to a point where a new approach, holding,… is initiated.

40. Holding Entry Zones
Entry into a holding pattern shall be executed according to the heading considering a 5° flexibility zone between sector boundaries. Holdings entry are divided in 3 procedures : - Sector 1 - Parallel entry : In this sector the aircraft when overhead the fix shall follow the outbound heading flying parallel to the inbound track during the defined time or distance. Then the aircraft must turn left to the holding side to either intercept the outbound track or return to the fix. - Sector 2 - Offset entry : In this sector the aircraft turn onto a heading with a 30° angle from the inbound track reciprocal in the holding side during the defined time, distance or radial. Then it must turn right to intercept either the outbound track or return to the fix. - Sector 3 - Direct entry : Overhead the fix the aircraft turns right and follow the holding pattern as defined. When entering a VOR/DME Holding pattern an entry radial to a secondary fix placed at the end of the outbound leg may be defined and if so Sector 1 and 2 entry are not allowed. The pattern shall be entered by the entry radial or by sector 3 entry.

41. What is the minimum SID climb gradient?
3.30%

42. What is Obstacle clearance altitude/heigh (OCA/H)?
Obstacle Clearance Altitude/Height (OCA/H) is the lowest altitude or height on an instrument approach procedure at which a pilot can initiate a missed approach without hitting an obstacle.

43. What is the minimum, optimum and maximum glidepath angle for a precision approach?
Minimum: 2.5º Optimum: 3º Maximum: 3.5º

44. What is a standard holding pattern?
Right hand turn; 1 minute per inbound leg below 14000' and 1.5 minutes above 14000'; Rate of turn 3° per second or a bank angle of 25°, whichever requires the lesser bank

45. What are the sector of entries for a holding pattern?
Sector 1: Parallel entry (110º) Sector 2: Offset/ teardrop entry (70º) Sector 3: Direct entry (180º) There is a zone of flexibility of 5º on either side of the sector boundaries.

46. When do you start the outbound timing?
It begins over or abeam the fix, whichever occurs later. If the abeam position cannot be determined, start the timing when the turn to outbound is completed.

47. What is the difference between type A and B instrument approaches? What are the meteorological conditions for each?
Type A approaches have a DH/MDH of 250 ft or more. For type B a DH of less than 250 ft is published and they are subcategorized by CAT I, II or II. On CAT I a DH not lower than 200ft and either a visibility not less than 800 m or a RVR not less than 550 m. CAT II a DH down to 100 ft and a RVR not less than 300 m. For CAT III a DH lower than 100 ft or no decision height and a runway RVR than 300 m or no RVR limitations.

48. What is an omnidirectional departure?
Omnidirectional departures are used when there are no adequate navigation aids available, or for some other reason no track guidance is provided. The departure begins at the departure end of the runway (DER). Because each aircraft lifts off at a different distance along the runway, the omnidirectional departure procedure assumes that any turn above the minimum 394 ft limit doesn’t occur until the aircraft is at least 600 m from the beginning of the runway. There must be at least 75 m (246 ft) of obstacle clearance before the aircraft turns through more than 15º.

49. What is the definition of DA/DH?
Decision altitude (DA) or decision height (DH) is the altitude/height where the pilot flying makes the decision either to continue visually to land or initiate a go-arround in a precision approach. A precision approach ends in a DA/DH.

50. How is the Obstacle clearance altitude/height (OCA/OCH) determined?
The OCA/OCH is determined as follows: Precision approach procedure. The lowest altitude (OCA) or alternatively the lowest height above the elevation of the relevant runway threshold (OCH), at which a missed approach must be initiated to ensure compliance with the appropriate obstacle clearance criteria. Non-precision approach procedure. The lowest altitude (OCA) or alternatively the lowest height above aerodrome elevation or the elevation of the relevant runway threshold, if the threshold elevation is more than 2 m (7 ft) below the aerodrome elevation (OCH), below which an aircraft cannot descend without infringing the appropriate obstacle clearance criteria.


AGK
1. What is the purpose of dual ignition in a piston engine?
It is used to improve combustion efficiency.

2. What does detonation in a piston engine mean, and when can it occur?
Detonation is also referred as the pre-ignition in the cylinder before the spark occurs. It can occur due to a low octane fuel, high cylinder temperature (due to a lean mixture), carbon deposits and higher than normal compression rates.

3. What happens to the mixture when the carburetor heat is on?
The mixture gets richer because the air entering the carburetor is less dense while the fuel flow stays the same.

4. What are the benefits of fuel injection systems in relation to carburetor?
Fuel injection systems deliver a carefully measured amount of fuel to the engine making then more efficient, reliable, better protection against icing and quicker response times.

5. What is the purpose of the idle check?
Check if the engine continues to operate normally in idle power, so that in case of a go-around the engine will not stutter when accelerating to full power

6. What is the purpose of a magneto impulse coupling?
It is a spring that retards the spark in the cylinder until the piston is in the top dead center. It releases a strong spark while at low speeds (engine starting). It is inhibited at high speeds due to the centrifugal force

7. What is the relation between the compression ratio and octane rating?
The higher the compression ratio, the octane rating has to be higher to resist detonation.

8. What are the crank assembly components?
Pistons, connecting rods and crankshaft.

9. What is function of the ELT and how can it be activated?
The standby mode is with the switch in the middle position and in this position the ELT is armed. The system can become active automatically by the shock sensor in ELT or it can be activated manually by switching upwards on the controller. In case of activation the ELT sends information to the nearest emergency centers such as the position, registration of the aircraft/owner.

10. What is vapor lock?
It is a blockage in the fuel line caused by fuel vapor bubbles.

11. Where is situated the engine oil pressure gauge?
Downstream of the oil pump.

12. What is the function of the carburetor on a piston engine?
To supply a correct fuel-air mixture to the engine.

13. What can happen if the mixture is not leaned at very high altitudes?
There is a decrease in engine power due to a less efficient fuel-air ratio. That can also lead to spark plug fouling due to carbon accumulation.

14. What is the main purpose of the lubrication system on an air-cooled piston engine?
To reduce internal friction and provide cooling.

15. What is the operating principle of a float type carburetor?
The narrow section at the venturi causes a pressure drop (due to a higher speed) that draws fuel into the airstream through the fuel jet where it is atomized and mixed with the air.

16. What is a needle valve in a float type carburetor?
It is a component that works with the float to regulate the fuel that goes to the float chamber.

17. Why do you keep cranking if an engine fire has been detected?
When an engine fire has been detected, you must close the fuel feed by turning it to OFF and keep cranking the engine in order suck the flames and extinguish the fire.

18. What is the difference between dry and wet sump and what are the advantages of the dry sump?
The dry sump system has a separate oil reservoir while the wet sump system stores the oil in the bottom of the engine. Some of the advantages of the dry sump system is the increased oil capacity and the ability to better stabilize the oil temperature.

19. What is the purpose of the static dischargers ?
Static dischargers (or static wicks) are mounted on aircraft trailing edges to safely dissipate accumulated static electricity into the atmosphere during flight.

20. How does a reciprocal engine work ?
The primary objective of an engine is to convert energy into movement, we can observe the following energy cycle within an engine, first the chemical energy is transformed into heat energy that converts into pressure energy to finally obtain mechanical energy. But in order to do that the engine must follow a cycle, this cycle is the Otto cycle and consists of 4 phases being : - Intake - Compression - Expansion - Exhaust This cycle works perfectly in theory but isn’t practical, that's why in practice those phases overlap with some phases leading and other phases lagging.

21. How does an injection system work ?
We can observe two types of fuel injection systems : - Indirect injection system In this system, fuel is injected into the intake manifold or intake ports, where it mixes with air before entering the combustion chamber. - Direct injection system In this system, fuel is injected directly into the combustion chamber, allowing for more precise control of the air-fuel mixture and improved efficiency. The principal components of a injection system are : - Engine driven fuel pump, mechanically driven by the engine supplies high-pressure fuel to the system. - Auxiliary electric fuel pump, provides additional fuel pressure during critical phases such as engine start or under high-demand conditions. - Fuel Control Unit, regulates fuel flow based on engine operating parameters such as throttle position, manifold pressure, and engine speed. - Manifold, distributes the air (in indirect systems) or the air-fuel mixture evenly to the cylinders. - Injectors, precisely meter and atomize fuel.

22. How does a magneto work ?
The purpose of a magneto is to generate high-voltage electricity by converting mechanical energy into electrical energy using electromagnetic induction. Magnetos delivers this voltage to the spark plugs at the right moment in the engine’s cycle. As the engine turns, it rotates the magnet inside the magneto, passing through the coil’s magnetic field. The rotating magnet induces a small current in the primary coil. At a precise moment (based on engine timing), the breaker points open. This interrupts the primary current. The collapsing magnetic field induces a much higher voltage (15,000–20,000+ volts) in the secondary coil. This high-voltage pulse is routed via the distributor to the correct spark plug, igniting the air-fuel mixture.

23. Magnetos, what is the maximum rpm drop and the tolerable difference between both? What if the RPM doesn't drop?
150 RPM max drop; 50 RPM difference between magnetos; Magnetos aren't grounded if by doing the check we don't notice RPM drop

24. What is the function of the variable pitch propeller?
It optimizes power delivery through the flight, like car gears, letting you set the optimum rpm and MAP for the desired flight phase While fixed pitch are only efficient once at a specific speed and rpm, constant speed props can be efficient in all flight phases.

25. Is this aircraft approved to use any other fuel grade besides 100LL grade?
Yes, alternatively 100 grade (green) AVGAS is approved.

26. How is engine ignition provided? Does this system depend on the electric system?
Engine ignition is provided by two engine-driven magnetos, and two spark plugs for each cylinder. Because the system is entirely self-contained, it does not rely on any external system such as a battery to function.

27. How is air provided for the engine? How is the engine protected from ingesting foreign matter into it?
The engine receives ram air through an intake on the lower front portion of the engine cowling. This intake is covered by an air filter to remove dust and foreign matter from the induction air.


METEO
1. What happens to the air density when the air is more humid?
The air density decreases because the lighter water molecules replace the heavier nitrogen and oxygen molecules. Less water vapor in the air means that the air is drier and therefore denser because there is an abundancy of heavy nitrogen and oxygen molecules.

2. What is the minimum speed of a jet stream?
60kts

3. Where can a jet stream be found?
At the boundary between a cold and a warm layer, on the warm side.

4. What is geostrophic wind?
It is the wind that results from the balance between the pressure gradient force and the Coriolis force. It flows parallel to straight isobars. Exists in the upper atmosphere were there is almost no friction and is almost non-existent at the equator due to the lack of Coriolis force.

5. Where can clear air turbulence be found?
In the vicinity of a jet stream and CB. Occurs when there is a rapid change of wind speed/direction.

6. How is the visibility in fog, mist and hazy conditions?
Less than 1000 meters in fog, between 1000 and 5000 in mist and bellow 5000 m in haze. Fog and mist consist of water droplets while haze is a mixture of fine particles like dust and smoke.

7. What is considered a gust?
It is when the wind deviates more than 10 kts in less than a minute over a short distance.

8. What are the requirements of CAVOK?
CAVOK (ceiling and visibility ok) means no significant clouds (TCU and CB), visibility higher than 10km and no clouds bellow 5000’ or above the MSA.

9. What is the meaning of gust?
It is when the average wind speed is exceeded by 10 or more knots for at least 20 seconds.

10. What meaning has a cross on a front in the chart of the frontal systems?
The cross on the front means the disappearance or marked weakening of a front.

11. What is the meaning of a TREND forecast?
A TREND forecast is published as supplementary information to the current METAR and it is valid for the next 2 hours. This section can detail anything from the wind, weather, visibility and cloud groups

12. The cloud base reported in a METAR is based on what height/altitude?
Height above aerodrome level (AAL).

13. What is the difference between METAR and ATIS wind information?
In the METAR wind are reported as true and, in the ATIS, they are reported as magnetic.

14. What is the time of the average wind reported on the METAR and on the ATIS?
In the METAR the time period is 10 min while in the ATIS it is 2 min.

15. What is a SIGMET and AIRMET?
They are area broadcasts for low level flights.

16. What does TEMPO mean in meteorology?
The phenomena described in the TEMPO can occur within half of the period forecasted but no more than 1 hour straight.

17. How does icing on the airframe affect the aircraft performance?
Icing causes stall speed to increase and the critical angle of attack to lower.

18. What are the differences between clear and rime ice?
Clear ice is transparent, heavier, smoother and harder to remove. Rime ice is granular, white and rough.

19. What is the approximate geographic area applicable to TAF, METAR/SPECI and local reports?
The area lies within an 8km radius from the Aerodrome Reference Point.

20. What is a Front ?
A front is a boundary between two air masses with different temperature, humidity, and density. Because of these differences, the air masses tend not to mix or merge. They produce significant amounts of cloud and precipitation. Fronts extend not only horizontally but also vertically. Their surface position is usually marked on surface pressure weather charts. [image 2.3.1.]

21. What defines a cold front ?
Symbolized as a line with triangles, often colored blue, the presence of a cold front indicates that cold air is advancing and pushing underneath warmer air. This occurs because cold air is denser, or “heavier,” than warmer air. The tips of the triangles indicate the direction in which the front is moving. A cold front typically moves faster than a warm front. Before the passage: The temperature is warm, and atmospheric pressure begins to decrease steadily. Cirrostratus and altocumulus clouds are present, with light, patchy rain. Visibility is fair to poor, with haze, and the dew point is high and steady. During the passage: The temperature cools rapidly. Atmospheric pressure drops to its lowest point, then begins to increase. Winds become gusty and shifting, usually moderate to severe. Thunderstorms occur due to the presence of cumulonimbus and cumulus congestus clouds. Visibility is poor but improving, and the dew point drops suddenly. After the passage: The temperature continues to cool steadily, and atmospheric pressure increases gradually. Wind speeds decrease. Patchy altocumulus or stratocumulus clouds appear, along with higher cirrus and lingering cumulonimbus clouds. Precipitation may still occur but will eventually clear. Visibility is generally good except during showers, and the dew point continues to fall.

22. What defines a warm front ?
Symbolized as a line with semicircles, often colored red, the presence of a warm front indicates that warm air is advancing and gradually rising over colder, denser air. Unlike cold fronts, warm fronts move more slowly and have a more gradual slope. The semicircles point in the direction the front is moving. Before the passage: The temperature is cool or cold, and atmospheric pressure is steady or falling slowly. High clouds such as cirrus and cirrostratus appear first, followed by altostratus and eventually nimbostratus as the front approaches. Light to moderate continuous precipitation develops. Visibility gradually decreases, and the dew point rises slowly. During the passage: The temperature begins to rise steadily. Atmospheric pressure reaches its lowest point. Winds may be light to moderate. Overcast skies dominate, with steady rain or drizzle. Visibility is generally poor, and the dew point continues to rise. After the passage: The temperature becomes noticeably warmer, and atmospheric pressure begins to rise slowly. Winds settle into a more consistent direction. Clouds begin to break up, with stratus or stratocumulus often remaining. Precipitation wise there will be light drizzle, gradually ceasing. Visibility improves considerably, and the dew point stabilizes at a higher level.

23. What defines a stationary front ?
Symbolized as a line with alternating triangles and semicircles on opposite sides, often colored red and blue, a stationary front represents a boundary between two air masses—typically cold and warm—that are not significantly advancing. This occurs when the forces of the two air masses are relatively balanced, causing the front to stall in place for an extended period.

24. What defines an occluded front ?
Symbolized as a line with alternating triangles and semicircles on the same side—usually colored purple—an occluded front forms when a cold front overtakes a warm front, lifting the warm air off the ground. This marks the later stage of a frontal system’s life cycle and often brings complex weather patterns. There are two types of occlusions depending on the relative temperatures of the air masses involved: Cold Occlusion: The cold air behind the front is colder than the cool air ahead. As the cold front catches up, it lifts both the warm air and the cool air ahead of the warm front. Warm Occlusion: The cold air behind the front is warmer than the cold air ahead. In this case, the overtaking front rides up and over the denser, colder air ahead. Before the passage: Conditions resemble those ahead of a warm front. Temperatures are relatively mild, and clouds gradually increase—starting with high-level cirrus and cirrostratus, followed by altostratus and nimbostratus. Light to moderate, steady precipitation begins. Atmospheric pressure slowly decreases, winds are from the southeast or south, and the dew point rises. During the passage: In a cold occlusion, temperatures drop noticeably as the colder air replaces the less-cold air at the surface. In a warm occlusion, temperatures may remain steady or even rise slightly, since warmer air replaces colder air at the surface. In both cases, pressure reaches its minimum and then begins to rise. Winds shift (usually becoming northwesterly or westerly), and precipitation can intensify. Cloud cover is thick and low—typically nimbostratus, with possible embedded cumulonimbus in more active systems. Thunderstorms are possible if enough instability is present. Visibility is poor but may start to improve. After the passage: The weather gradually clears. In a cold occlusion, temperatures remain cool or drop further. In a warm occlusion, milder air may persist briefly before cooling resumes. Pressure rises steadily, precipitation becomes lighter or ends, and clouds begin to break up—often leaving stratocumulus or scattered cumulus. Visibility improves, and the dew point gradually falls as drier air moves in.

25. What are the differences between orographic and frontal storms ?
Orographic Storms occur when warm moist air is pushed up on the windward side of a mountain or a mountain range. When the air rises it will cool down and when it reaches its dew point saturation is going to occur, when the cloud becomes too heavy it will lead to precipitation on the windwardside. On the leeward side the air will descend causing it to warm-up leading to the cloud dissipation without any precipitation on this side of the mountain.Those storms are common in late spring and early summer. On the other hand, frontal storms occur when a cold air mass undercuts a warm air mass, TS are more likely to develop ahead of a cold front at a point called the cold nose. This point is created due to the difference infriction at the surface holding back the front movement.The cold nose allows for warm air to be underneath cold air leading to a significant instability.Those conditions allows TCU formations and EMBD TS to form.

26. What are the different types of ice and under which conditions can they form?
Clear ice, also known as glaze ice, forms when large supercooled water droplets collide with the aircraft and do not immediately freeze. Instead, they spread out over the surface before solidifying, creating a smooth, transparent or translucent coating. This type of ice is typically found in cumulus clouds or areas of freezing rain, where droplet sizes are larger. It is particularly dangerous because it can build up quickly and unevenly, often extending beyond the reach of de-icing systems. Its weight and the way it disrupts airflow can significantly degrade aircraft performance. Rime ice forms when small supercooled water droplets strike the aircraft and freeze instantly upon contact. This rapid freezing traps air bubbles, resulting in a rough, opaque, and brittle coating that appears milky or white. Rime ice tends to form in stratiform clouds, where the water droplets are smaller. While it’s usually lighter than clear ice and easier to remove, rime ice still disrupts the smooth airflow over the wings and control surfaces, which can lead to aerodynamic inefficiencies. Mixed ice, which forms when both large and small supercooled droplets are present in the same environment—often in cumulonimbus clouds or regions where different types of cloud layers intersect. Mixed ice is a combination of clear and rime, resulting in a lumpy, irregular surface that is both heavy and aerodynamically disruptive. This type of ice can be very challenging to remove and poses one of the greatest risks to aircraft, especially if the aircraft is not equipped with advanced anti-icing systems. Hoar frost develops on the ground, typically overnight, when moisture in the air condenses and freezes onto cold aircraft surfaces. It appears as a thin layer of white, feathery crystals and can be easily overlooked. However, even a small amount of hoar frost on a wing can disturb airflow enough to increase stall speed or degrade lift, making proper pre-flight inspection and removal essential.

27. What is the freezing level and how can it influence your flight ?
The freezing level is the altitude in the atmosphere at which the temperature drops to 0ºC, freezing point of water.. In ISA conditions the freezing level would be at 7,500ft but it constantly varies depending on the conditions. Flying through clouds, rain or snow in this zone increases the risk of ice forming on wings, control surfaces and sensors.

28. What is Freezing Rain/Drizzle (FZRA/FZDZ) ?
Freezing rain and drizzle consist of supercooled water droplets (SCWD), which can be up to 500 microns in size. Supercooled water droplets are liquid water droplets that remain in liquid form even though their temperature is below 0°C. This occurs because there are no nuclei/particles or surfaces present to trigger freezing. Under certain conditions, water can remain in a liquid state well below freezing — sometimes as cold as -40°C. These conditions are extremely dangerous due to the extensive ice accretion that can occur on parts of the airframe not normally prone to ice buildup — for example, side windows, the upper and lower surfaces of the wing aft of the protected (anti-ice/de-ice) areas, as well as on the propeller or sensor probes.

29. What are the different types of fogs ?
Radiation Fog → It forms overnight or when land loses heat up to the dew point or close to it. The fog is often patchy and low. It may spread and become more dense throughout the night. Depth Varies from a few feets up to 1500’. Conditions to form : High Relative Humidity, Light winds (2-8 KTS), Clear skies and long nights. The cooling of the ground will cause the air layer closest to it to become colder than above layers resulting in a nocturnal inversion. Sun radiations cause the air to become warmer and also cause thermal turbulence allowing for hot dry air to be mixed with cool humid air below. An increase in wind speed also causes the fog to disperse due to mechanical mixing. Fog may lift into a Stratus or Stratocumulus. Advection Fog → It is formed when warm, moist, stable air moves over a colder surface causing it to cool up to the dew point. It usually happens in temperate regions adjacent to the coast or over land in winter over frozen or snow-covered surfaces.It will clear when there is a change in air mass or when the wind will lift it up into a cloud. Evaporation, steam, arctic smoke → It forms when relatively cold, stable air lies over a relatively warm, moist surface. The cold air causes the evaporation of the moist warm air to condense forming fog. It can occur over lakes, rivers and seas. Frontal Fog → It forms near a front when rain falling from a relatively warm air mass saturates in the cooler air close to the air in front of the front. Hill, Up-slope Fog → It occurs when air is forced to rise up a hill or a mountain and to cool adiabatically causing the air to cool up to the dew point.To an observer off the mountain it appears as clouds but to an observer on the mountain it appears as fog.

30. What is the difference between fog and mist ?
Fog is formed by water droplets or ice crystals. It occurs when the air reaches saturation over the surface and sufficient cooling takes place for condensation to happen. Fog can start whenever the difference between dewpoint and temperature is less than 2°C causing the visibility to drop below 1000m. Mist is also formed by water droplets but doesn’t reduce the visibility as much as the fog (VIS>1000m).

31. What are the different types of inversions ?
We can encounter 5 different type of inversion : - Ground These inversions occur mostly at night due to radiation cooling or when warm air is advected over a cold surface. - Subsidence This inversion occurs within high pressure systems when dry warm air descends from above. - Turbulence This inversion occurs due to the turbulence mixing air from a certain height with air close to the ground causing a change in the environmental lapse rate. - Frontal This inversion occurs when warm air is replacing cold air at a higher rate associated with a front causing cold air to be trapped below warm air. - Valley These inversions occur at night as cold air has a tendency to pool down in the valley as it is more dense that warm air.

32. How can we determine if the atmosphere is stable or unstable ?
In order to determine if the atmosphere is either stable or unstable we must compare temperature lapse rates. The temperature lapse rate represents the rate at which a rising air pacel cools but it also determines if when rising it will continue rising, settle or sink back. We compare the following three lapse rates : - ELR - Environmental Lapse Rate This represents the actual rate at which air temperature decreases with altitude. - DALR - Dry Air Lapse Rate This represents the rate at which dry air temperature decreases with altitude (-3°C/1000’). - SALR - Saturated Air Lapse Rate This represents the rate at which saturated air temperature decreases with altitude (-1,8°C/1000’). Knowing these three parameters we can determine the following atmosphere conditions : - Stable The atmosphere is said to be stable when the ELR is < to the SARL and DALR. - Unstable The atmosphere is said to be unstable when the ELR is > to the SARL and DALR. - Conditionally unstable The atmosphere is said to be conditionally unstable when the ELR is SALR < < DALR.

33. What are the characteristics of a stable atmosphere ?
A stable atmosphere resists vertical motion. If a parcel of air is lifted, it becomes cooler and denser than the surrounding environment and will return to its original level. This means we can find the following weather characteristics : - Layered clouds - Poor visibility - Light or Steady precipitation - Fog - Temperature inversions - Limited turbulence

34. What are the characteristics of an unstable atmosphere ?
An unstable atmosphere enhances vertical motion. A lifted air parcel remains warmer and less dense than the surrounding air and continues to rise on its own. This means we can find the following weather characteristics : - Cumuliform clouds - Showers and thunderstorms - Good visibility between cells - Turbulence - Hail, Lighting and Windshear

35. What are the characteristics of a conditionally unstable atmosphere ?
A conditionally unstable atmosphere is stable for unsaturated air but becomes unstable once the air reaches saturation (i.e., condensation occurs). So, lifting must occur until the parcel reaches its dew point, at which point it becomes buoyant. This means we can find the following weather characteristics : - No clouds unless a lifting process occurs (topography,...) - Cumuliform clouds (if the lifting process occurs) - Showers or thunderstorms possible

36. What is a jet stream and how does it form ?
A jet stream is a narrow band of airflow with a wind velocity greater than 60 KTS, those high velocity airflows are found at high altitude and occur due to important temperature differences between air masses. They usually develop within the warm air side. We observe 4 jet streams around the globe : Subtropical Jet Stream → This jet stream is permanent in both hemispheres and is located at the boundary of Hadleyand Ferrel cells. It occurs around FL400 but varies during the year, they are found around 25°to 40° N-S in Winter and 40° to 45° in Summer. Polar Front Jet Stream → This jet stream is also permanent in both hemispheres and is located at the boundary ofFerrel and the Polar cell. This jet stream frequently starts and stops unlike the SubTropical JetStream. It occurs around FL300 and between 40° to 65° N-S, those values vary during the year. Tropical Easterly Jet Stream → This jet stream is seasonal, only found in theNorthern hemisphere. It occurs when a significant temperature difference is reached between warm West Africa, India and their relatively cooler oceans. It occurs at FL450 and is found between 10° to 20° N. Arctic Front Jet Stream → This jet stream is seasonal, only found in the Northern hemisphere and not common. It occurs at the boundary of the warmer polar maritime air and colder arctic air. It occurs fromFL200 to FL300 and around 60°N.

37. What is a METAR ?
A METAR (Meteorological Aerodrome Report) is an aviation routine weather observation report that provides current weather conditions at an airport or aerodrome. It is issued every hour (or more frequently if conditions change significantly).

38. What is a TAF ?
A terminal aerodrome forecast (TAF)is a forecast (not a report) of expected conditions. TAFs describe the forecast conditions at an aerodrome and cover a period of not less than 6 hours and not longer than 30 hours. Routine TAFs valid for less than 12 hours are issued every 3 hours and those valid for 12 up to 30 hours every 6 hours.

39. What is a VOLMET ?
VOLMET is a continuous and repetitive voice broadcast service that provides meteorological information to aircraft in flight. It transmits reports such as METARs and sometimes TAFs for selected aerodromes relevant to international air navigation. These broadcasts are made at scheduled intervals using HF or VHF radio frequencies, depending on the area and coverage needs. The purpose is to ensure that aircraft operating en route, especially over long distances or remote regions, receive timely and accurate weather updates. VOLMET broadcasts help support flight safety by keeping flight crews informed of changing meteorological conditions along their route and at their destination.

40. What is a GAMET ?
A GAMET is an area forecast in abbreviated plain language for low-level flights (up to FL100) for a flight information region or sub-area thereof, prepared by the meteorological office designated by the meteorological authority concerned and exchanged with meteorological offices in adjacent flight information regions, as agreed between the meteorological authorities concerned.

41. What is a AIRMET?
AIRMET Reports are warnings in abbreviated plain language for a specified FIR or sub-area thereof, it covers less severe weather when compared to SIGMETs and are valid for 6 hours. An AIRMET is an information issued by a meteorological watch office concerning occurrence or expected occurrence of specified en-route weather phenomena which may affect the safety of low-level aircraft operations (up to FL100) and which was not already included in the forecast issued for low-level flight issued in the FIR concerned or sub-area thereof. The weather phenomena described in an AIRMET may be strong winds, low visibility, thunderstorms, significant clouds, moderate icing and turbulence. We have 3 types of AIRMETs : - AIRMET S, for mountain obscuration or IFR (ceiling less than 1000’ or visibility less than 3NM over 50% of the area) - AIRMET T, for turbulence (moderate turbulence, surface winds of 30 kts or more or convective low-level windshear) - AIRMET Z, for icing (moderate icing with freezing level height)

42. What is a SIGMET ?
SIGMET information is information issued by a meteorological watch office concerning the occurrence or expected occurrence of specified en-route weather phenomena which may affect the safety of aircraft operations, they are valid for a period of 4 hours. The following phenomenon may be included in a single SIGMET message : Thunderstorms, tropical cyclones, turbulence, icing, mountain waves, dust storms, sand storms, volcanic ash and radioactive clouds. We can also have 2 special types of SIGMETs valid for 6 hours : - WV - Volcanic SIGMET, to notify volcanic ash. - WC - Tropical Cyclone SIGMET, to notify hurricane or cyclone activity

43. What are SIGWX Charts ?
The Significant Weather Charts are produced daily with 6 hour intervals (0000Z, 0600Z, 1200Z, 1800Z) by the World Area Forecast Centres of London and Washington. Those charts apply to FL100 up to FL630 providing weather information for medium and high altitudes during a specified time, the following phenomenon are indicated : - Jet-Streams including speed and depth - CAT - Embedded CB - Tropopause Levels - Tropical Revolving Storms - Volcanic eruptions generating Ash clouds - Widespread DS/SS - Radioactive material accidentally released

44. What is the coverage area of a TAF?
They are valid from the arerodrome reference point (ARP) withing a 8km radius.

45. What is the reference used for wind directions?
In text issued information, for example: METAR, TAF and Charts, true north is used as reference and in audio published information, for example: ATIS or ATC, magnetic north is used.

46. If you're crusing at FL370 and the temperature is -50°C, what is the ISA deviation?
The minimum ISA temperature is 56.5ºC which occurs about 36 000ft so the deviation is 6.5ºC

47. How does the air temperature affect relative humidity?
The amount of water vapors a parcel of air can hold depends on its temperature, warmer air can hold more water, colder air holds less water important to note that although in warmer air, the relative humidity is low,  the absolute humidity may be very high and in contact with cold surfaces it's more likely to ice than in cold weather.

48.  How are clouds formed, explain succinctly?
Moisture present in the air is lifted either by convection, turbulence, fronts or orographic lifting (Mountains) and adiabatic cooling of the air occurs (this means the air is cooled without heat exchange due to the reduction in pressure). Now, if the air is cooled its ability to hold water is decreased, increasing the RH until the dewpoint is reached and the saturation of that parcel of water occurs, so it condenses, and those water droplets create a cloud

49. How and why are thunderstorms a hazard to aviation?
Thunderstorms don't come alone, they are accompanied by other severe weather like Cbs and most often the following occurs: o Severe windshear o Severe turbulence o Severe icing especially clear ice from the SC water droplets which is the most dangerous of icing o Hail can cause serious structural damages to the aircraft and numerous cases have happened o Reduced visibiltiy o Lightning strikes can cause damage to the electrical system o Radio communication and navigation interference from static electricity present in thunderstorm These storms are usually hidden inside cumulonimbus, like said before, that is why this type of cloud should be avoided whenever possible and stay clear by 10 nautical miles

50. How does wind change with height?
In general, the wind in the northern hemisphere increases in speed and veers in direction with an increase of height. In SH, the wind increases in speed and backs in direction with increase in height.

51. What is a trough?
A trough is a V-shaped extension of a low-pressure system. Air flows into a trough (convergence) and rises. If the air is unstable, weather like that found in a depression or a cold front will occur, like cumuliform clouds and cumulonimbus clouds.

52. What is the definition of BECMG?
Becoming: Indicates a gradual but permanent change in conditions expected to occur over a specified timeframe. This period normally will not exceed 2 hours but it will never be more than 4 hours.

53. What is the definition of PROB?
Indicates the probability of certain weather conditions occurring, expressed as a percentage. It's often combined with TEMPO to signal a chance of temporary events like thunderstorms or rain showers.

54. What weather is associated with a Low pressure system?
In low pressure systems the air flows anti-clockwise in the northern hemisphere, it is characterised by rising air. It´s associated with: - Unstable and turbulent conditions; - Good visibility (except in showers); - Significant clouds; - Significant precipitation; - Strong winds.

55. What weather is associated with a High pressure system?
The air is descending and flowing outwards ate the surface. The air is typically dry and warms up as it descends. It´s associated with: - Stable, fair weather; - Light winds; - Poor visibility (fog, mist, haze); - Few to no clouds; - No precipitation.

56. What are the types of turbulence?
Thermal turbulence: when the sun heats the earth´s surface unevenly, causes the warm air to rise and create updrafts. Mechanical turbulence: caused by wind flowing over or around obstacles like mountains, buildings, trees, etc. Which disrupt the airflow and create turbulent areas. Frontal turbulence: occurs in weather fronts, especially in cold fronts, where warmer and colder air masses colide. Clear Air turbulence (CAT): commonly found at higher altitudes near jet streams, CAT occurs in areas without visible clouds or storms

57. What does a Surface Analysis Charts provide?
Show pressure systems, fronts, and weather patterns across large areas.

58. What is the difference between FEW, SCT, BKN and OVC?
The difference is in the oktas, which is the amount of cloud coverage: o FEW: 1-2 oktas o SCT: 3-4 oktas o BKN: 5-7 oktas o OVC: 8 oktas

59. What is a temperature inversion and why is it a concern for pilots?
A temperature inversion means the temperature is increasing instead of decreasing and it's important to be aware of this since it usually is accompanied by weak visibility, windshear, turbulence and degraded performance

60. Explain the formation of mountain waves.
Mountain waves form when stable air flows over a mountain range. The air is forced upward on the windward side and then descends on the leeward (downwind) side. Because the air is stable, it oscillates up and down, creating a series of waves. They cause severe turbulence specially in rotor clouds that form beneath the mountain tops The mountain waves can sometimes be identified by the lenticular clouds

61. What is dew point?
The dew point is the temperature to which air must be cooled for it to become saturated, or in other words, its relative humidity is 100%. This means that the parcel of air is unable to retain any more water vapour.

62. What is the dry adiabatic lapse rate and the saturated adiabatic lapse rate?
Dry air when caused to rise or descend, changes temperature at a rate of 3º C per 1000ft which represents the Dry adiabatic lapse rate (DALR). Saturated adiabatic lapse rate (SALR) however, is when the saturated air (100% humidity), when caused to rise or descend, changes temperature by an average of only 1.8ºCper 1000ft.

63. What is absolute stability?
Absolute stability describes a tendency of a displaced parcel of air to return to its original position once the initial displacement force has ceased, regardless of whether the parcel contains dry or saturated air.

64. What is the weather like in Absolutely Stable Conditions?
- Clouds. Since vertical development is resisted, any cloud produced will be flat or layered. These are called stratiform clouds. - Precipitation. Precipitation, if any, is likely to be fairly light in intensity. However, it may be persistent because of the horizontal extent of the cloud. Because of the lack of vertical movement clouds are unable to produce large rain droplets or hail. We should expect only drizzle, fine rain, snow or snow grains. - Visibility. The lack of vertical movement causes atmospheric contaminants such as dust and smoke to stay close to the surface, meaning visibility is generally poor because of haze, fog or mist. - Turbulence. Stable atmospheres produce little or no turbulence due to the stagnant vertical airflow.

65. What are mountain waves?
Mountain waves are turbulent undulating waves of air which can form above and downwind of a mountain range. They can extend 50 to 100nm downwind and upwards to the tropopause.

66. What is windshear?
Windshear is a large change in wind direction and/or speed, including updrafts and downdrafts, or in other words, variations in wind vectors along the flight path of an aircraft with a pattern, intensity and duration that will displace an aircraft abruptly from its intended flight path such that substantial control input and action is required to correct it.

67. What is a downburst?
A downburst is an area of strong, downward moving air associated with a downdraft from a thunderstorm. As the downdraft impacts the ground, the air is forced outwards in all directions and also curls backwards which results in extremely severe winds close to the surface and on the ground.

68. What is Clear Air Turbulence?
Clear Air Turbulence (CAT) occurs whenever there is rapid change of wind speed and/or wind direction caused by jet streams, and they can be a huge hazard to the aircraft due to the severe turbulence associated with them.

69. What are the differences between stratiform, cumuliform and cirriform clouds?
- Stratiform clouds: Clouds which are generally flat or stratified with a large horizontal extent but very little vertical extent; - Cumuliform clouds: Clouds which are tall but which have relatively little horizontal extent. These clouds generally have a heaped appearance and a cauliflower-like shape; - Cirriform clouds. Clouds which are fibrous, wispy or hair-like in appearance. These are only found at high levels in the troposphere. The 2 most significant for pilots are stratiform and cumuliform clouds.

70. Clouds are reported on METAR and forecasted in TAF above what reference?
Clouds are reported above aerodrome level.

71. What is a cloud ceiling?
Cloud ceiling is the lowest layer of cloud of more than 4 oktas.

72. What are the 4 mechanisms of cooling?
Conduction, Advection, Radiation and adiabatic cooling or uplift.

73. What are the most common mechanisms which cause air to rise?
Turbulent uplift and mixing, orographic uplift, convection, frontal uplift and convergence.

74. What are the hazards associated with precipitation?
Precipitation has a significant impact on aircraft operations because it can: Reduce visibility; Cause airframe icing; Cause malfunctions of aircraft sensors; Cause flame-out of gas turbine engines (in heavy rain); Cause structural damage (hailstones); Dangerously degrade take-off and landing performance).

75. Describe frontal thunderstorms.
Frontal storms occur where a cold air mass undercuts a warm air mass. Thunderstorms are most likely to develop just ahead of the cold front at the point where the cold front curls under itself (the cold nose). This cold nose is caused by the greater friction at the surface which holds back the advance of the lowest part of the leading edge of the cold front. The cold nose puts warm air under the cold air which greatly increases the lapse rate and leads to significant instability. Towering cumulus and embedded thunderstorms form within the surrounding stratiform cloud which makes them very difficult to see

76. What is a Squall Line?
A Squall line is a line of thunderstorms that can be several hundred miles long. It usually forms just ahead of a cold front. Squall lines are most common over large continental areas. On surface pressure charts they are shown as a solid black line.

77. What are the threats associated with icing?
- Increases the aircraft’s mass which increases the stall speed. - Increases the aircraft’s drag which increases the power required. - Alters the lift characteristics of the wing, causing loss of lift, lift dissymmetry and unpredictable stall characteristics. - Builds up in jet engine air intakes reducing the inflow to the engine resulting in loss of power or engine surge. - Builds up on jet engine fans and inlet guide vanes resulting in loss of power and/or engine surge/stall. - May jam control surfaces. - It can cover windscreens, limiting forward visibility. It can cause malfunctioning of aircraft sensors.

78. What are supercooled water droplets?
Supercooled Water Droplets (SCWD) are liquid droplets of water whose temperature is below 0ºC. These cloud droplets are much smaller than rain and can exist in clouds from 0ºC down to -40ºC and SCWD are highly unstable.

79. Differences between Rime Ice and Clear Ice?
Rime ice forms when small SCWD come into contact with an airframe surface colder than 0°C. Small SCWD freeze almost instantaneously. The rapid freezing traps tiny air bubbles making rime ice look opaque and white. Because the droplets freeze instantly, rime ice builds forwards into the air flow. Clear ice is much more hazardous than rime ice because it is heavier, tougher, affects a greater surface area and is difficult to remove. It is a hazard to navigation because clear ice forming in flight causes jammed controls and degraded aerodynamic performance resulting in loss of control. Clear ice is almost transparent and has a glass-like appearance. It forms when the leading edges of the airframe (below 0°C) come into contact with large SCWD.

80. What are the problems with piston engine icing?
- Carburettor Icing: This is the most common type of induction system icing. It is caused by a combination of the temperature drop due to fuel vapourisation and the reduction in pressure at the carburettor venturi. The temperature reduction may be as much as 20-30°C. Ice gradually builds up, constricting the venturi and progressively reducing engine power. Conventional float-type carburettors are more prone to this type of icing than those equipped with a pressure jet. The problem is most acute in warm, moist conditions with the throttle at or close to idle. - Intake (Impact) Ice: This refers to ice which builds up on air intakes, filters and carburettor heat intakes or alternate air valves etc. Impact ice can accumulate in snow, sleet or sub-zero temperature clouds, or in rain when the temperature of the rain or the aircraft is below 0°C. Less commonly it can occur when flying through super-cooled rain. This type of icing affects fuel injection systems as well as carburettor systems. Impact ice builds up most rapidly at about -4°C in conditions in which visible ice is forming on other parts of the aircraft. - Fuel Icing: Fuel icing is the freezing of water held in suspension in the fuel. Frozen water can block fuel pipes, leading to the loss of engine power due to fuel starvation.

81. What are the classifications of fog?
Fog can be classified as: Radiation fog, advection fog, evaporation/steam fog or arctic smoke, frontal fog, hill/up-slope fog.

82. Definition of vertical visibility.
Vertical visibility is defined as the distance one can see upwards into a surface-based obscuration or the maximum height from which a pilot in flight can recognize the ground through a surface-based obscuration.

83. What is an isobar?
An isobar is a line on a meteorological chart that joins places of equal pressure.


AIRLAW
1. What is the minimum distance from the shore where an aircraft is required to have life jackets on board?
For a single engine piston airplane, the distance to the shore should be no more than the gliding distance.

2. What is the definition of mountainous area according to EASA?
It is an area of changing terrain profile where the changes of elevation exceed 900 m (3 000 ft) within a distance of 18,5 km (10,0 NM);

3. What is the minimum height allowed for a VFR flight above the ground or water, excluding take-off or landing and flights over congested areas of cities, towns or settlements?
The minimum altitude is 500ft.

4. What does trip fuel include?
Fuel for take-off, climb, cruise, approach and landing at the destination.

5. What is the meaning of minimum fuel?
Minimum Fuel means that the aircraft has sufficient fuel only to reach the planned destination, carry out the approach and landing, and touch down with the necessary reserves.

6. In regards to Radar Separation, when can the Standard 5NM be reduced?
A Radar Separation can be reduced to 3NM if the radar capability allows and can be further reduced to 2.5NM if the aircraft are on same final track within 10NM of runway end.

7. What is the RVR that should be taken into consideration regarding the continuation of approach procedures?
The touchdown zone RVR should be the controlling RVR. If the TDZ RVR is not available, then the midpoint RVR should be used.

8. What is RVR?
RVR stands for Runway Visual Range, and it is the range over which the pilot of an aircraft on the center line of a runway can see the runway surface markings or the lights delineating the runway or identifying its center line.

9. When is the RVR information provided?
It is reported when the RVR or the visibility is below 1500m.

10. What are the types of RVR?
Touchdown RVR, mid-point RVR and stop-end RVR

11. When can CMV be used instead of RVR?
If the RVR is not reported except to satisfy take-off minima, or for the purpose of continuation of approaches in LVO.

12. What are the visual references necessary to continue or begin an approach?
(a) elements of the approach lighting system; (b) the threshold; (c) the threshold markings; (d) the threshold lights; (e) the threshold identification lights; (f) the visual glide path indicator; (g) the TDZ or TDZ markings; (h) the TDZ lights; (i) the FATO/runway edge lights;

13. What is the meaning of Low Visibility Operation (LVO)?
Low visibility operations (LVO) mean approach or take-off operations on a runway with a runway visual range less than 550 m or with a decision height less than 200 ft.

14. How can take-off minima be expressed?
It can be expressed as visibility (VIS) or Runway Visual Range (RVR).

15. What should the take-off minima ensure in terms of aircraft control?
The take-off minima should ensure sufficient guidance to control the aircraft in the event of both a rejected take-off in adverse circumstances and a continued take-off after the failure of the critical engine.

16. What are the MDH and Minimum VIS in Circling for a Category A airplane?
MDH - 400 ft Minimum VIS - 1500 m

17. What is the lowest RVR for a visual approach operation?
The operator should not use an RVR of less than 800 m for a visual approach operation.

18. What happens if the reported visibility (VIS) or controlling RVR for the runway to be used for landing is less than the applicable minimum?
An instrument approach operation shall not be continued past a point at which the aeroplane is 1 000 ft above the aerodrome elevation or into the final approach segment (FAS) if the DH or MDH is higher than 1 000 ft.

19. What happens if no RVR is reported and the reported visibility is bellow the minimum?
If the CMV is greater than the minimum, the instrument approach can be continued to the DA/H or MDA/H.

20. What is a special VFR flight?
It is a VFR flight cleared by air traffic control to operate within a control zone in meteorological conditions below VMC.

21. What is the Aerodrome Reference Point?
It is a point on the aerodrome designated as the official aerodrome location. It shall be placed near the geometric center of the aerodrome.

22. What types of airspace do we have in Portugal?
Class A, C, D, and G. Within the Santa Maria FIR we have A, C and G. Within Lisboa FIR we have C, D, and G.

23. What are the characteristics of class A airspace?
- Only IFR flights are allowed. - ATC service provided. - No speed restriction - Clearance and two-way radio communication required.

24. What are the characteristics of class C airspace?
- Separation provided by ATC between IFR-IFR, IFR-VFR, VFR-IFR. - VFR-VFR traffic information only and traffic avoidance on request. - Speed is restricted to 250 below FL100 - Clearance and two-way radio communication required. - VMC minima: Above FL100: 8Km visibility, 1500m horizontal separation from clouds and 1000’ (300m) vertical separation from clouds. o Bellow FL 100: 5Km visibility, 1500m horizontal separation from clouds and 1000’ (300m) vertical separation from clouds.

25. What are the characteristics of class D airspace?
- Separation by ATC between IFR-IFR. - Traffic information between IFR-VFR and VFR-VFR and traffic avoidance on request. - Speed is restricted to 250 kts bellow FL100. - Clearance and two-way radio communication required. - VMC minima: o Above FL100: 8Km visibility, 1500m horizontal separation from clouds and 1000’ (300m) vertical separation from clouds. o Bellow FL 100: 5Km visibility, 1500m horizontal separation from clouds and 1000’ (300m) vertical separation from clouds.

26. What are the characteristics of class G airspace?
- No separation provided. - Only Flight Information Service provided to IFR and VFR flights. - Speed is restricted to 250 kts bellow FL100. - ATC clearance not required. - Two-way radio communication required for IFR flights and VFR flights within the ATZ and RMZ. - VMC minima: o Above FL100: 8Km visibility, 1500m horizontal separation from clouds and 1000’ (300m) vertical separation from clouds. o Bellow FL 100 to 3000’ AMSL or 1000’ AGL (whichever is higher): 5Km visibility, 1500m horizontal separation from clouds and 1000’ (300m) vertical separation from clouds. o Bellow 3000’ AMSL or 1000’ AGL (whichever is higher), 5 Km clear of clouds and ground/water in sight.

27. What are the 3 AIP Parts about?
Part 1 General Part 2 En-route Part 3 Aerodromes

28. What is the difference between an AIP amendment and supplement.
An amendment contains information about permanent changes to the AIP. A supplement contains temporary information longer than 3 months.

29. Name the 3 airplane wake turbulence categories.
Light – less than 7000kg Medium – between 7000 kg and 136000 kg Heavy – more than 136000kg

30. What is AIRAC and its purpose ?
AIRAC stands for Aeronautical Information Regulation and Control, its a cycle occurring every 28 days for a single AIRAC cycle or 56 days for a double AIRAC cycle. Its purpose is to ensure the validity and integrity of the navigation database used in the FMGS base. Unless otherwise specified in the operation manual or in an AMC flight crew must use the in-date navigation database.

31. What is the aircraft minimum equipment for RNAV and RNP?
For all RNAV and RNP systems and operations, as a minimum the systems must provide the following : - Continuous lateral deviation indication - Distance and Bearing to the next active waypoint - GS or Time to the next active waypoint - Navigation Data storage - Failures indication

32. For PBN operation what is the acceptable difference between the loaded procedure and the chart ?
As stated in the EASA Reg 965 PART CAT for PBN operations the active flight plan, if applicable, should be checked by comparing the charts or other applicable documents with navigation equipment and displays. Including confirmation of the departing runway and the waypoint sequence, reasonableness of track angles and distances, any altitude or speed constraints, and, where possible, which waypoints are fly-by and which are fly-over. Where relevant, the RF leg arc radial should be confirmed.

33. What are the requirements for Baro-VNAV operations ?
BAro-vnav is intended to be applied on IAPs where vertical path information is defined by.a vertical path angle or by altitude constraints on other phases than approach. Before being able to operate baro-vnav RNP APCH procedure the following must be complied with : - Aircraft equipment eligibility must be determined and documented - Operating procedures must be documented - Pilot training based on the operating procedures must be documented - Documents must be accepted by the State regulatory authority - Operational approval must be obtained in accordance with national operating rules; For IAPs the error of the airborne baro-vnav equipment must be less than the following : [table 0.0.0.63] During the FAS when Baro-VNAV is used for vertical path guidance deviations both above and below the baro-vnav path must not exceed +- 22m (+- 75’).

34. What are the baro-vnav temperature constraints ?
For aircrafts using baro-vnav without temperature compensation, low temperature omits are depicted on the approach plate along with any high temperature limit where applicable as the temperature affects the aircraft GPA for the approach : - Low temperature, reduce the actual GPA - High temperature, increase the actual GPA Temperature limitations may be disregarded for aircrafts flying the procedure with temperature compensation or when using an alternative means for vertical guidance such as SBAS. One must remember that only the FAS is protected by the promulgated temperature limits, the effect on terrain and obstacle clearance in all phases of flight must be taken into account by the flight crew.

35. RNP APCH using baro-vnav procedure ?
Flight crew must realize the normal checks of a PBN approach procedure as well as the following : - Flight crew must set and confirm the correct barometric setting - Check that the two altimeters values do not differ by more than 100’ at or before the FAF - Flight crew must fly the procedure with a current local altimeter setting source

36. What is TERPS ?
TERPS stands for Terminal Instrument Procedures, they are described in the FAA order No 8260.3D. They are used by the USA, NATO military procedures and some other countries (Canada, Taiwan, Korea,…). TERPS refers to the set of criteria and rules used to design instrument flight procedures such as IAPs, STARs, SIDs, Holdings,… The most significant differences between TERPS and ICAO PANS-OPS are on approach minimas, turn radius and protection as well as for circling approaches. Generally TERPS afford a lower safety margin than those based on PANS-OPS.

37. What are the key differences between TERPS and PANS-OPS ?
[table 0.0.0.67]

38. PBN ATC vectoring and positioning
ATC Tactical interventions may include radar headings, direct-to clearances, interception of an Initial or Intermediate approach segment as well as the insertion of additional waypoints loaded from the database. For direct-to clearances the following must be complied with : - Direct-to the IF shall be accepted provided the aircraft will be established on the Final Approach Track at least 2 NM before the FAF - Direct-to the FAF should not be acceptable - Intercepting the Final Approach Track before the FAF should be acceptable for radar-vectored arrivals or with ATC approval - Final Approach Track shall be intercepted no later than the FAF in order to be correctly established before starting the descent - Direct-to clearance to a fix receding a RF leg should not be permitted One must keep in mind that radar vectors shall not be accepted when below the MSA.

39. Can minimas be changed during an RNP APCH ?
In the case that during a LPV approach, for example, the system detects a LOI and reverts to lower minimums such as LNAV/VNAV or LNAV only can the pilots modify the minimums according to the new system approach even if the LPV approach as already started. According to SOPs unless the flight crew has sufficient visual references to continue the approach to a safe landing RNP APCH should be discontinued if : - Navigation failure is annunciated - Lateral or vertical deviations exceeding the tolerances - Loss of the on-board monitoring and alerting system Where vertical guidance is lost while the aircraft is still above 1000’ AGL the flight crew may continue the approach and revert to LNAV minimas provided the navigation system supports it.

40. What are the different types of airspace areas ?
Restricted area : It’s an airspace of defined dimensions above the land areas or territorial waters of a State, within which the flight of aircraft is restricted in accordance with specific conditions. Danger area : It’s an airspace of defined dimensions within which activities dangerous to the flight of aircraft may exist at specified times. Prohibited area : It’s an airspace of defined dimensions, above the land area or territorial waters of a state, within which the flight of aircraft is prohibited.

41. What are RMZ and TMZ?
RMZ stands for Radio Mandatory Zone, for VFR Flights operating in classes E, F and G Airspace or IFR Flights operating in class F or G airspace shall maintain continuous air-ground communications and maintain two-way communication as required on the designated frequency. TMZ stands for Transponder Mandatory Zone, for all flights operating within designated TMZ shall carry and operate a SSR Transponder with the ability to operate modes A and C or S mode unless alternative provisions are prescribed by the Air Navigation Service Provider.

42. What is an ATZ ?
ATZ stands for Aerodrome Traffic Zone, it is an airspace of defined dimensions established around an aerodrome it is intended to protect the aerodrome traffic, the traffic on the manoeuvring area and the traffic in the immediate vicinity of an aerodrome. This includes, but is not limited to, the aircraft in the aerodrome traffic circuit. The ATZ may be controlled or uncontrolled, if an ATZ is uncontrolled AFIS must be provided. The center of the ATZ may be the Aerodrome Reference Point (ARP) or the center of the longest RWY. No specific dimensions are defined but it’s usually a cylinder extending from the ground to a specific altitude involving the aerodrome circuit. In order to fly to or from an ATZ, the aircraft must have a FPL filled, maintain bi-lateral coms, follow specified departure or arrival procedures.

43. hat are the differences between CTR, CTA and TMA ?
CTR → It stands for Control Zone and provides an area of airspace for controlled traffic to enter and leave airports. The lateral limits contain the paths of IFR SIDs and STARs and they extend at least 5 NM from the center in the direction from which approaches are made. CTA → It stands for Control Area, they can be corridors such as airways and ATS routes or volume of airspace above airports known as TMA. The vertical limit can be expressed as altitude or as FL but can’t be lower than 700’ AGL and different altitudes may be defined within a CTA. A CTA upper limit is defined when ATC isn’t provided above that limit or the CTA is located below an upper CTA. TMA → It stands for Terminal Manoeuvring Area, it's a CTA normally established at the confluence of ATS routes in the vicinity of a major aerodrome.

44. What is a Special VFR ?
Special VFR flights may be authorised to operate within a control zone, subject to an ATC clearance. Except when permitted by the competent authority for helicopters in special cases such as, but not limited to, police, medical, search and rescue operations and fire-fighting flights, the following additional conditions shall be applied: (a) such special VFR flights may be conducted during day only, unless otherwise permitted by the competent authority; (b) by the pilot: (1) clear of cloud and with the surface in sight; (2) the flight visibility is not less than 1500 m or, for helicopters, not less than 800 m; (3) fly at a speed of 140 kts IAS or less to give adequate opportunity to observe other traffic and any obstacles in time to avoid a collision; and (c) an air traffic control unit shall not issue a special VFR clearance to aircraft to take off or land at an aerodrome within a control zone, or enter the aerodrome traffic zone or aerodrome traffic circuit when the reported meteorological conditions at that aerodrome are below the following minima: (1) the ground visibility is less than 1500 m or, for helicopters, less than 800 m; (2) the ceiling is less than 180 m (600 ft).

45. What is the MEL ?
MEL stands for Minimum Equipment List, it is a list which provides for the operation of aircraft, subject to specified conditions, with particular equipment inoperative (which is) prepared by an operator in conformity with, or more restrictive than, the MMEL established for the aircraft type. The master minimum equipment list (MMEL) is a list established for a particular aircraft type by the organisation responsible for the type design with the approval of the State of Design which identifies items which individually may be unserviceable at the commencement of a flight. The MMEL may be associated with special operating conditions, limitations or procedures.

46. What are the MEL Categories ?
Within the MEL the inoperability of certain items and the rectification interval are stated using 4 different categories : - Category A, No interval specified - Category B, Item shall be rectified within 3 calendar days excluding the day of discovery. - Category C, Item shall be rectified within 10 calendar days excluding the day of discovery. - Category D, Item shall be rectified within 120 calendar days excluding the day of discovery.

47. What is the CDL ?
CDL stands for Configuration Deviation List, is a list established by the organization responsible for the type design with the approval of the State of Design, which identifies any external parts of an aircraft type which may be missing at the commencement of a flight, and which contains, where necessary, any information on associated operating limitations and performance correction. It usually is part of the Aircraft Flight Manual (AFM).

48. What is the purpose of the SERA ?
SERA stands for Standardised European Rules of the Air. It is a set of harmonized regulations established by the European Union to ensure the safe and uniform application of air traffic rules across EU member states. These rules are based on the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) Standards and Recommended Practices (SARPs) but have been adapted for the European context. SERA apply to the following : - EU Airspace, SERA governs the use of airspace within all EU member states to maintain uniformity and safety in air operations. - EU Registered Aircrafts, Aircraft registered in an EU member state must comply with SERA, even when operating outside EU airspace, provided SERA does not conflict with the local rules of the country where the aircraft is flying. - Authorities and Service providers, SERA is applicable to competent authorities of EU member states, Air Navigation Service Providers (ANSPs), and relevant ground personnel involved in air operations. SERA shall be consulted when preparing flight within, to or from EU Airspace, Cross-border operations within EU Airspace, and Conflict Resolution as SERA usually prevails unless explicitly stated by local rules.

49. What is the purpose of the ICAO Doc 8168 ?
The ICAO Document 8168 concerning procedures for air navigation aircraft operations (PANS-OPS) consist of 3 volumes of the document : - VOL I - Flight Procedures, this volume describes the operational requirements for flying the designed procedures. - VOL II - Construction of Visual and Instrument Flight Procedures, this volume describes the essential areas and obstacle clearance requirements for safe and regular instrument flight operations. - VOL III - Aircraft Operating Procedures, describes operational procedures recommended for the guidance of flight operations personnel and flight crew.

50. How is the ICAO Doc 8168 Vol I structured ?
ICAO Doc 8168 Vol I states operational requirements for flying designed procedures, it consists of the following sections : - Section 1, General Requirements - Section 2, Departure Procedures - Section 3, En-Route Procedures - Section 4, Arrival Procedures - Section 5, Approach Procedures - Section 6, Holding Procedures - Section 7, Procedures for use by helicopters

51. Take-Off Operations by non-certified LVTO aircrafts
The take-off minima shall be expressed as RVR or VIS taking into account relevant factors for the runway planned and aircraft equipment as well as obstacle avoidance on departure and cloud ceiling should be specified. Moreover the take-off minima must ensure sufficient guidance to control the aircraft in the event of a rejected or continued take-off after failure. During nighttime operations runways lights shall be in operation. [table 5.1.1] Remember : CMV cannot be used to satisfy take-off minima but the initial part or the take-off run may be replaced by pilot assessment

52. Types of Departure Procedures
Departures can be either : - Straight A straight departure is one in which the initial departure track is within 15° of the alignment of the runway centre line. - Turning A turning departure is one in which a turn of more than 15° is required. Straight flight is assumed until reaching an altitude/height of at least 120 m (394 ft) or until the DER in some cases. - Omnidirectional An omnidirectional departure is used in cases where no suitable navigation aid is available, or no track guidance is provided. Omnidirectional departures may specify sectors to be avoided. For departure procedure a minimum climb gradient of 3,3% is assumed but in case where obstacles prevail this minimum climb gradient may be increased.

53. Take-Off Alternate
The operator shall select and specify in the operational flight plan a take-off alternate aerodrome if either: - The airport of departure meteorological conditions are below the operator’s landing minima - For other reasons the return to the departure airport wouldn’t be possible. The take-off alternate shall be within a distance that minimises the risk of exposure to abnormal or emergency situations. In order to do so the operator shall consider the following : - Meteorological conditions - Aerodrome infrastructure - Navigation and Landing capabilities of the aircraft - Approvals of the operator For twin-engined aircrafts the take-off alternate should be either 1h flight time at OEI cruising speed, in ISA, still air conditions and at the ATOM or 2h maximum with ETOPS Approval. For three to four engined aircraft it shall be located within 2h flight time at all-engine operating cruising speed. For single-engine aircraft operating under IFR conditions or at night it shall be within 30’ flight time at normal cruising speed in still air at the ATOM.

54. Types of Fuel and Energy Schemes
EASA considers 3 main type of Fuel/Energy Schemes : → Basic Fuel/Energy Scheme : It shall ensure a safe, effective and efficient operation based on an analysis of safety and operational data from previous performance and industry experience. → Basic Fuel/Energy Scheme with variations : It’s the basic scheme with a variation deducted from the safety and operational analysis. → Individual Fuel/Energy Scheme : It derives from a comparative analysis of the operator’s safety and operational data and applies scientific principles. It has a higher level of safety than the basic scheme. All the previously stated scheme shall comprise : - a fuel/energy planning and in-flight replanning policy - an aerodrome selection policy - an inflight fuel/energy management policy

55. Individual Fuel/Energy scheme requirements
In order to apply for an individual Fuel/Energy scheme the operator shall comply with the following : Baseline Safety Performance → The operator shall establish Safety Performance Indicators (SPIs) and targets, it shall also collect relevant data for at least 2 years. It must also identify possible hazards of this individual scheme (Safety Risk Assessment) and implement a mechanism to monitor and control those hazards. Demonstrate its capacity → The operator shall exercise sufficient control over processes and use of resources but also then processes and procedures are implemented, crew and personnel are trained and the effectiveness of those processes is monitored. Operational capabilities → Computerised flight-planning system, use current aircraft-specific data, airborne fuel prediction system, RNP 4 and RNAV 1 certified, perform LVO and RNP APCH to VNAV minimas, landing option update via an operational control system.

56. Fuel/Energy planning and in-flight replanning policy
The fuel/energy planning of the flight shall be based on current aircraft-specific data provided either by the aircraft manufacturer or by the fuel/energy consumption monitoring system. The planning shall also include at least the following operating conditions : - Fuel consumption data - Anticipated masses - Anticipated meteorological conditions - Deferred maintenance items and configuration deviations - Expected departure and arrival routing along with anticipated delays The fuel/energy planning shall include the fuel required for the flight : - Taxi Fuel/Energy, amount of fuel used before take-off - Trip Fuel/Energy, accounts for take-off, climb, cruise, descent, approach and landing. - Contingency Fuel/Energy, accounts for unforeseen factors it shall be 5% or 5’ holding speed at 1500’ whichever is the higher. - Destination Alternate Fuel/Energy, to fly from the destination aerodrome to the destination alternate aerodrome or required to hold at the destination aerodrome, while enabling the aeroplane to perform a safe landing, and to allow for deviations from the planned operation. - Final Reserve Fuel/Energy, 45’ for reciprocating engines or 30’ for turbine-engined aircrafts - Additional Fuel/Energy, depending on the type of operation - Extra Fuel/Energy, accounts for anticipated delays or operational constraints - Discretionary Fuel/Energy, required by the commander

57. En-route alternate procedure
This procedure allows the operator to reduce the contingency fuel from 5% to 3% if certain conditions are met. The following requirements apply : - Aerodrome should be located within a circle with a radius equal to 20 % of the total flight plan distance - The center of this circle should lie on the planned route at a distance from the destination aerodrome equal to 25 % of the total flight plan distance, or at least 20 % of the total flight plan distance plus 50 NM, whichever is greater - All distances should be calculated in still-air conditions - The ERA should be nominated in the operational flight plan

58. What is CMV and how is it used ?
CMV stands for converted meteorological visibility, it is a value equivalent to the RVR derived from the reported meteorological visibility. The following conditions apply to the use of CMV : - If the RVR is not available, CMV may be used except : to satisfy the take-off minima purpose of approach continuation in LVOs - If the minimum RVR for an approach is more than the maximum value assessed by the aerodrome operator. We can apply CMV in the following scenarios : - Flight planning purposes, use x1.0 factor - Other purposes the table must be followed [table 7.5.16] Where RVR is not available and CMV may be used it shall be equal or greater than the lowest RVR minima determined.

59. Destination Alternate
During flight planning, for each IFR flight the operator must select one or more aerodromes in order to have 2 safe landing options during normal operations either when reaching destination or when reaching the ERA/Point of no return in case of isolated aerodrome. The operator may operate without a destination alternate if the duration of the planned flight is less than 6 hours and in the event of an in-flight replanning the remaining flight time doesn’t exceed 4 hours. Also 2 separate runways are usable with the weather report/forecast ensuring that from 1h before and 1h after the ETA ceiling is at least 2000’ or circling height + 500’ and ground visibility >5km.

60. Emergency Transponder codes
Pilots operating an aircraft equipped with a transponder are required to set specific codes during certain emergency situations. These codes help ATC identify the nature of the emergency quickly and efficiently, even if radio communication is not possible. There are three standard emergency transponder codes, each corresponding to a specific type of emergency: Code 7500 — Unlawful Interference (Hijacking): This code is used when the aircraft is subjected to unlawful interference, such as a hijacking or any situation where the aircraft's control is being compromised by unlawful means. Setting this code discreetly informs ATC of the situation without the need for verbal communication, which might not be possible or safe during such an event. ATC will respond appropriately, often without directly referencing the code to avoid escalating the situation. Code 7600 — Radio Communication Failure: This code is set when the aircraft experiences a total radio communication failure. By setting 7600, the pilot informs ATC that they are unable to communicate via radio. ATC will recognize this and attempt to provide instructions through other means, such as visual signals or via relay through other aircraft, while the pilot follows established procedures for lost communications. Code 7700 — General Emergency (Mayday): This code is used for any other general emergency situation that does not involve unlawful interference or communication failure, such as engine failure, fire on board, medical emergencies, or other critical situations requiring immediate attention. Setting 7700 alerts all radar-equipped ATC units and other aircraft that the aircraft is in an emergency state, prompting an immediate priority response from ATC. It is important to note that these codes are recognized internationally and should only be used in the situations described. Incorrect use can cause unnecessary emergency responses and confusion.

61. The ATS flight Plan on a IFR flight should be submitted before the scheduled time of departure by how much time?
60 minutes before estimated off block time if atc is required

62. Regarding Landings, explain LDR and ASDR?
The LDR is the distance from the point the aircraft crosses the screen height of 50ft above the threshold until it comes to a full stop on the runway. The ASDR is the distance a pilot calculates to accelerate to v1 and stop (rejected takeoff)

63. When is an alternate airport required?
No alternate is required if the destination forecast (±1 hour of estimated time of arrival) meets the following conditions: o Ceiling: at or above 2000 ft above aerodrome level or 500 ft above the minimum sector altitudehichever is higher. Visibility: at least 5 km or 2x the minimum required visibility for the approach whichever is higher. If either ceiling or visibility is below these values, an alternate aerodrome is mandatory. If there is no instrument approach at the aerodrome, an alternate is required

64. What is a STAR?
STAR stands for Standard Instrument Arrival Route, and it guides the aircraft from the enroute phase to the final approach phase.

65. What is a SID?
A Standard instrument departure is like a star, but, like the name says for departures, it links the take-off phase with a point in the en-route phase.

66. Explain the CDFA technique.
A Continuous Descent Final Approach (CDFA) is a descent flown without extended level-offs, using idle or near-idle thrust, from cruise altitude down to the final approach fix. This profile is more efficient, reduces environmental impact, lowers noise levels, and contributes to a more stabilized descent.

67. What are the rules defining MSA (minimum sector altitude)?
MSA gives 1000ft clearance clearance withing 25nm of a navaid in various directions Should be used/consulted for emergencies and not part of a normal approach

68. Name the flight and navigational instruments and associated equipment for operations under IFR.


69. Are anti-collision lights required for IFR flight at night?
Yes, unless the PIC determines it to be a hazard to the flight

70. When must supplemental oxygen be used by the flight crew when flying IFR?
Above 12,500 ft up to 14,000 ft for periods exceeding 30 minutes, and continuously above 14,000 feet MSL.

71. Where can you find the planes equipment list?
AIP Enroute 1.10

72. Where can you find the differences between a country’s national regulation and ICAO standards?
The differences between the country regulation and the ICAO standards are found on the country’s AIP GEN section on “GEN 1.7 - Differences From ICAO Standards, Recommended Practices And Procedures”, which are published in the order of each ICAO annex followed by the chapter and associated difference(s).

73. When filling a flight plan, where can information regarding flight plan submission, filling and further information be verified?
Information for flight plan filling such as equipment codes and associated capabilities, route filling and even other information you want to provide in your flight plan, may all be checked on AIP section ENR, more specifically “ENR 1.10 Flight Planning”.

74. What is the difference between an AIP Amendment and an AIP Supplement?
AIP amendments contain permanent changes to the AIP. On the other side an AIP Supplement are temporary changes of long duration (three months or longer) and information of short duration, which consists of extensive text and/or graphics, supplementing the permanent information contained in the AIP.

75. How are NOTAM types segmented? How are they divided?
NOTAMs are published in three series (A, C and D). Series A contain information concerning: - International aerodromes; - National Aerodromes at which instrument flight procedures or special VFR procedures are established; - General Rules; - En-Route Navigation and Communication Facilities; - Airspace restrictions and Navigation Warnings; - En-Route Air Navigation Obstacles. Series C and D - Contains information concerning: - National Aerodromes / Heliports at which only VFR flights are permitted; - Amendment to any section of the VFR Manual; According to GEN3 Services at “3.1.3 Aeronautical publications”

76. Which segments of clearances or instructions should the flight crew read back?
The flight crew shall read back safety-related parts of ATC clearances and instructions. The following items shall always be read back: - ATC route clearances; - Clearances and instructions to enter, land on, take off from, hold short of, cross, taxi and backtrack on any runway; - Runway-in-use, altimeter settings, SSR codes, newly assigned communication channels, level instructions, heading and speed instructions; - Transition levels, whether issued by the controller or contained in ATIS broadcasts. Other clearances or instructions, including conditional clearances and taxi instructions, shall be read back or acknowledged in a manner to clearly indicate that they have been understood and will be complied with.

77. When two aircraft are converging at approximately the same level, what is the right of way?
When converging the aircraft that has the other on its right shall give way, with the following exception: - Power-driven heavier-than-air aircraft shall give way to airships, sailplanes and balloons; - Airships shall give way to sailplanes and balloons; - Sailplanes shall give way to balloons; - Power-driven aircraft shall give way to aircraft which are seen to be towing other aircraft or objects.

78. What is the requirement to perform simulated instrument flights such as you do at EAN?
According to SERA.3220 Simulated instrument flights, fully functioning dual controls are installed in the aircraft; and an additional qualified pilot (in this rule called a safety pilot) occupies a control seat to act as safety pilot for the person who is flying under simulated instrument conditions. The safety pilot shall have adequate outside view, or a competent observer in communication with the safety pilot shall occupy a position in the aircraft from which the observer’s field of vision adequately supplements that of the safety pilot.

79. How much time of delay constitutes a need to amend the flight plan?
In the event of a delay of 30 min. in excess of EOBT for a controlled flight or 1 hour for an uncontrolled flight it should be amended. For any flight operated in accordance with IFR, delays of more than 15 min. shall be communicated to the network manager.

80. What is a Special VFR flight and what are the requirements for it?
These are VFR flights authorised to operate within a control zone in meteorological conditions below VMC subject to an ATC clearance. The requirements specified in SERA.5010 Special VFR in control zones are the following: - These flight may be conducted during day only, unless otherwise permitted by the competent authority; - The aircraft is clear of clouds and with the surface in sight; - Visibility is not less than 1 500 m or, for helicopters, not less than 800 m; - Fly at a speed of 140 knots IAS or less to give adequate opportunity to observe other traffic and obstacles in time to avoid collision; - ATC shall not issue special VFR clearance to take-off or land at an aerodrome within a CTR, or enter the ATZ or traffic circuit when the reported meteorological conditions are below 1 500 m or, for helicopters, not less than 800 m. And the ceiling is less than 600 ft.

81. What is the difference between TORA, TODA, ASDA and LDA?
- Take-off run available (TORA): The length of runway declared available and suitable for the ground run of an aeroplane taking off. - Take-off distance available (TODA): The length of the take-off run available plus the length of the clearway, if provided. - Accelerate stop distance available (ASDA): The length of the take-off run available plus the length of the stopway, if provided. - Landing distance available (LDA): The length of runway which is declared available and suitable for the ground run of an aeroplane landing.

82. How is the aerodrome elevation determined?
Aerodrome elevation is the elevation of the highest point of the landing area.

83. What is Visual Maneuvering (circling)?
Visual maneuvering describes the procedure in which the PF maneuvers visually to bring the aircraft into position for landing on a runway other than that used for the instrument approach. This is done when, for example, a crosswind makes the instrument runway unsuitable for landing but a low cloud base requires an instrument approach.


C172
1. What types of circuit breakers are there in the Cessna 172?
In 172 we have Push to Reset and with this kind of circuit breaker we need to make sure that it is only reset once and after that if the circuit breaker pulls out again we consider that system as Inop.

2. How many chapters are there in the C172 POH?
1-General 2-Limitations 3-Emergency Procedures 4-Normal Procedures 5-Performance 6-Weight and Balance (Equipment List) 7-Airplane Systems (Descriptions) 8-Airplane Handling (Service and Maintenance) 9-Supplements (Optional Systems Description and Operating Procedures)

3. On a Cessna 172, how long after starting the engine is acceptable to allow for the oil pressure to rise?
Within 30 seconds in hot weather and about 1 minute in cold weather. After that, stop the engine.

4. What precaution should we have when using an External Power Source?
If no avionics equipment is to be used or serviced the avionics master switch should be in the OFF position, do not crank the engine or start the engine with the avionics switch on the ON position. Before connecting an external power source, the avionics and the master switch should be turned off to prevent damage to the equipment by transient voltage.

5. When does the low fuel indication flashes on the annunciator panel?
Whenever the fuel in the tanks drops below 5 US GAL for approximately more than 60 sec.

6. What causes the stall warning to activate and when does it occur on Cessna 172?
As the airplane approaches a stall, the low pressure on the upper surface of the wings moves forward around the leading edge of the wing... this low pressure creates a differential pressure in the stall warning system which draws the air to the warning horn, resulting in an audible warning. On the C172 it is normally audible between 5 to 10 knots above the stall speed in all flight conditions.

7. When does the low voltage annunciator activate?
When the voltage falls below 24.5 volts.

8. When does the avionics fan on the C172 start cooling?
Whenever the master and avionics switches are both ON.

9. Is it normal to have a low voltage indication when operating at low RPM?
Yes, when operating at low RPM, the engine may not generate enough power to charge the battery.

10. Why are the fuel tanks vented?
To prevent a vacuum from forming, that way will result in a decreasing fuel flow from the tank to the engine and eventual engine stoppage. The venting is accomplished by an interconnecting line from the right fuel tank to left tank. The left fuel tank is vented overboard through a vent line and both fuel caps are vented.

11. Why should the fuel tanks on the Cessna 172 be filled to the top whenever it is possible?
Filling aircraft fuel tanks overnight is primarily done to prevent condensation of water in the tanks, reducing the risk of engine malfunction or fuel system corrosion.

12. In the case of a static port blockage, what happens to the airspeed indicator readings when the alternate static port is open?
The cabin pressure is slightly lower than the ambient pressure due to aerodynamic suction. Therefore, the airspeed indicator will overread slightly. In the Cessna 172 the maximum airspeed variation and altimeter variation from normal is 4kts and 30ft with windows closed.

13. How does the C172 electrical system work ?
The Cessna 172R and 172S electrical system is a 28-volt, direct current (DC) system powered by a engine belt-driven 60-amp alternator and a 24-volt battery. The K172R is a 28-volt, direct-current (DC) system powered by an engine belt-driven 38 amp alternator and a 24- volt battery. The 172N is a 14-volt, direct current (DC) powered by a engine belt driven 60-amp alternator and a 12-volt battery. Electrical power is distributed through a split-bus system that includes a primary and an essential bus, designed to separate vital components from non-essential loads. The alternator is the primary source of electrical power, while the battery provides backup and supports engine starting. When the engine is running, the alternator supplies power to the electrical system and charges the battery. A voltage regulator maintains system voltage at approximately 28 volts, ensuring proper operation and battery charging. In the event of alternator failure, the battery can supply power for a limited period, and pilots are advised to reduce electrical load to conserve battery life. The electrical system supports all avionics, lighting, flaps, and other electrically operated systems. Circuit breakers protect individual components from overcurrent conditions. An ammeter or load meter provides a visual indication of the electrical system status, showing whether the alternator is charging and the magnitude of the electrical load.

14. How does the C172 fuel system work ?
Fuel system consists in a gravity-fed design that varies slightly across different models, but its fundamental operation remains consistent. Fuel is stored in two wing tanks—one in each wing—and flows by gravity to a fuel selector valve, typically located between the pilot and copilot seats. The selector allows the pilot to choose LEFT, RIGHT, BOTH, or OFF. In most flight conditions, particularly during takeoff, climb, descent, and landing, the selector is set to BOTH to ensure balanced fuel draw. In cruise, selecting LEFT or RIGHT may be used to correct fuel imbalance. After leaving the selector, fuel passes through a fuel strainer and travels toward the engine compartment, where it is delivered to the engine via either a carburetor (C172N CS-DCU) or a fuel injection system (CK172N, C172S, C172R). While this affects how fuel is metered and delivered to the engine, it does not significantly change the layout of the fuel delivery system leading up to that point. Some models, particularly those with fuel injection (like the C172R and C172S), include both an engine-driven fuel pump and an auxiliary electric fuel pump. The electric pump provides backup pressure during engine start and as a contingency in case the engine-driven pump fails. In carbureted models like the 172N and P, there is no need for an auxiliary electric pump since gravity alone is sufficient.

15. How does the fuel indicator work ?
Fuel quantity is indicated by float-type sensors in each tank, connected to gauges on the instrument panel. However, as noted in the POH for all models, these gauges are not perfectly reliable, especially at low fuel levels, so visual inspection of fuel quantity during preflight is always recommended.

16. What are the C172 Flaps type ?
The Cessna 172R is equipped with single-slot wing flaps that are electrically operated and designed to improve the aircraft's lift and drag characteristics during takeoff, approach, and landing. Flap settings can be selected in increments of 0°, 10°, 20°, and 30° (40º in C172N) using a lever located on the center console between the front seats. When the flap lever is moved, an electric motor actuates the flaps accordingly. Extending the flaps increases lift, allowing for slower approach speeds and steeper descent angles, but also adds drag, especially beyond 20°, which significantly reduces climb performance. Exceeding VFE speed with flaps extended could cause structural damage. The flap system includes mechanical stops and circuit protection to prevent over-extension. In comparison, older models like the Cessna 172N had flap systems that could extend up to 40°, providing even more drag for steep descents, though this setting was later limited in newer models like the 172R to improve climb performance and reduce stress on the airframe. Pilots are advised to use flaps as needed but always monitor airspeed and flap position indicators to ensure safe operation, especially in go-around maneuvers.

17. What are the main instruments in Nortavia’s C172N/C172R ?
The main instruments are : Airspeed Indicator – Shows the aircraft's speed relative to the surrounding air (measured in knots). Attitude Indicator (Artificial Horizon) – Displays the aircraft’s orientation relative to the horizon (pitch and bank). Our airplanes are equipped with a Garmin G5 that works as a PFD (Primary Flight Display) displaying Attitude, Airspeed, Altitude, Heading, Vertical Speed, Turn and rate. Altimeter – Measures the aircraft’s altitude above sea level using atmospheric pressure. Vertical Speed Indicator (VSI) – Indicates the rate of climb or descent in feet per minute. Heading Indicator (Directional Gyro) – Shows the aircraft’s current compass heading. Our airplanes are equipped with Garmin G5 that works as a HSI (Horizontal Situation Indicator) Turn Coordinator – Shows the rate of turn and helps maintain coordinated flight by indicating yaw and roll.

18. What is the oil capacity of the engine?
Sump 8 Quarts Total 9 Quarts SOP, between 6-8 quarts of engine oil prior flight

19. The Cessna 172 maximum flap extended speed (VFE) is:
85 KIAS F10º-F30º 110 KIAS F10º

20. Where is the reference datum?
Lower portion of front face of firewall

21. What is the glide distance per 1000 ft? If you're crusing at 8000 ft and lose the engine how far can you go?
1.5nm per 1000 ft At 8000 ft we can expect to glide for 12nm, in zero wind condition with the flaps up

22. What is the C172 maximum deflection of the nose wheel?
10º each side, with breaking can reach 30º

23. What type of flaps does the aircraft use, and how are they actuated?
The flaps are single slot type are actuated by a small electric motor for both of the flaps They are protected by a 10 ampere circuit breaker

24. What is the installed engine type on the Cessna C172?
The engine is a normally aspirated, direct drive, air-cooled, horizontally opposed, fuel injected with four cylinders.

25. What does “direct drive” mean in the engine type description?
“Direct drive” in an engine description means the propeller is connected directly to the crankshaft, meaning that the prop spins at the same RPM as the engine crankshaft.

26. Why is prolonged uncoordinated flight prohibited when operating with fuel selector on LEFT or RIGHT with ¼ tank or less?
Because during prolonged uncoordinated flight (like side slips), the fuel in the selected tank may slosh away (shift away) from the tank’s fuel screen, causing an interruption of fuel flow leading to engine roughness or complete stoppage.

27. Before take-off you can verify smooth engine operation at idle speed if the RPM is within what range?
At idle speed the RPM should be within a range of 575 to 625 RPM.

28. During how much time may you crank the starter? And what is the cooldown period?
You may crank for 10 seconds and should wait about 20 seconds for each attempt (cooldown).

29. How many times may you repeat the start cycle?
A total of 3 times, then you should wait for 10 minutes. After this cooldown, you may repeat up to 3 times again. If the engine still fails to start, you should investigate to determine the cause.

30. List the aircraft’s primary and secondary flight control surfaces usually found on the C172.
The aircraft’s primary control flight surfaces are the elevators, ailerons and rudder. The secondary flight control surfaces are the flaps and trim systems.

31. Which type of lubrication system is this engine equipped with? What is the total capacity of oil in this system?
The engine utilizes a full pressure, wet sump-type system, with capacity of 8 quarts of oil.

32. What happens to the air induction system and engine in case the air filter becomes blocked?
The component formed by the air filter and intake, called air box, has a spring-loaded alternate air door. If the air filter becomes blocked, suction created by the engine will open the door and draw unfiltered air from inside the engine lower cowl area. This will result in an approximate 10% loss of engine power at full throttle.

33. Which phase(s) of flight are you allowed to operate using only the left or right tank?
The fuel selector valve should be in the BOTH position for take-off, climb, landing, and maneuvers that involve prolonged slips or skids of more than 30 seconds. Operation from either left or right tank is reserved for cruising flight.

34. At which quantity will the LOW FUEL message be displayed on the annunciator panel?
Anytime the fuel in the tank drops below approximately 5 USG (and remains below this level for more than 1min.), the amber LOW FUEL message will flash for 10 seconds and then remain steady.


C172R
1. What are the Vy and Vx speeds for the Cessna 172R?
Vy at sea level is 79kts and at 10000ft is 71kts. Vx at sea level is 60 kts and at 10000ft is 65kts.

2. What is the purpose of the magneto check? At what RPM should we do it in the 172R and what can be difference when checking them?
When doing the magneto check, we are checking if there is any problem with the grounding of each one of them (this verifies that each mag can be successfully turned off in the event of an engine fire), also checking if the ignition timing is correctly set and if all plugs are firing evenly and regularly on each magneto. For the magneto check, the engine (in the Cessna 172R) should be at 1800 RPM stable and the RPM drop while testing each magneto should not exceed 150RPM on either magneto or show greater than 50 RPM differential between magnetos.

3. What is the service ceiling of the Cessna 172R?
13,500 ft

4. What are the flight load factors limits at maximum takeoff weight for the Cessna 172R?
Flaps up: +3.8, -1.52g Flaps down: +3.0g - The design load factors are 150% of the above, and in all cases the structure meets or exceeds design loads.

5. The Cessna 172R maximum structural cruising speed (VNO) is:
129 KIAS; It's the speed we shouldn't exceed in smooth air.

6. The Cessna 172R never exceed speed (VNE) is:
163 KIAS; Never exceed this speed in any operation.

7. The Cessna 172R maneuvering speed (VA) at 2450lbs is:
99 KIAS is the maximum speed which we can use full abrupt movements in MTOW configuration; The maximum speed decreases with decreasing weight, and vice-versa.

8. What is the Vs0 for the Cessna 172?
33kts Stalling speed when the flaps are at the landing setting or minimum steady flight speed, at which the aeroplane is controllable in the landing configuration.

9. What is the Vs1 for the Cessna 172?
44kts at most foward CG with flaps retracted.

10. What is the static RPM range at full throttle on the Cessna 172R?
2065 2165 RPM

11. What are the Cessna 172R oil temperature limitations?
100ºF to 245ºF (37ºC to 118ºC) for normal operation Above 245ºF is the maximum

12. What are the Cessna 172R oil pressure limits?
50 to 90 psi for normal operation 20 psi minimum 115 psi maximum

13. What is the Cessna 172R center of gravity range?
Foward: 35.0 inches aft at 1950 lbs or less, with straight line variation to 40.0 inches aft of datum ate 2450 lbs. Aft: 47.3 inches aft of datum at all weights

14. The Cessna 172R fuel tank capacacity is:
6 USG (211 liters) Total 2 USG (7 liters) Unusable fuel 54 (200 liters) Usable fuel

15. What is the glide speed on the C172R?
65 KIAS

16. If your C172R experiences a total electrical failure in IMC, what flight instruments would likely remain operative?
We would have the Garmin g5 on battery giving us attitude, speed and altitude information, the HSI g5 will also operate, but since the flux valve is electrical it will drift over time, losing reliability of use; We'd still have the VSI and the compass as well

17. Which is the engine manufacturer and model for the Cessna C172R?
The manufacturer is Textron Lycoming model number IO-360-L2A.

18. What is the suggested cruise power for engine break-in operation? Until when should you perform C172R engine break-in?
The suggested power setting for engine break-in is 80% as much as practicable until a total of 50 hours has accumulated or oil consumption has stabilized.

19. How is the engine cooled?
The C172R engine is cooled only by ram air that enters through two intake openings in the front of the engine cowling. The air is directed around the cylinders and is then exhausted through an opening at the bottom aft edge of the cowling. No manual cowl flap cooling system control is provided.

20. How many fuel drain valves are installed in the C172R? Where are they located?
There’s 13 in total. 5 are installed on each wing and 3 under the aircraft near the engine cowling.


INST
1. What is maximum deflection on a CDI using a VOR and how many degrees each dot symbolizes?
VOR 2° per dot = Full scale deflection 10°

2. What happens to the altimeter experiencing time lag?
It under-reads in a climb and over-reads in a descent. The lag can be caused by partial static pressure line blockage.

3. What happens to the altitude indication when flying in both cold and warm air?
In cold air, indicated altitude is higher than true altitude (overread); In warm air, indicated altitude is lower than true altitude (underread).

4. What instruments are supplied with static, total and static and total pressure?
The airspeed indicator is supplied with both static and total pressure, the altimeter and the vertical speed indicator are supplied with static pressure only.

5. What happens to the altimeter and vertical speed indicator indication if the static pressure line becomes blocked?
The pressure inside the case and the capsule will remain the same therefore the pointers will not move.

6. How is dynamic pressure obtained?
It is the difference between total and static pressure.

7. What does the green, yellow and white arc correspond to in the air speed indicator?
Green corresponds to normal operating speed range, yellow corresponds to the caution speed range and the white arc corresponds to the flap operating speed range.

8. What happens to the altimeter and vertical speed indicator when the total pressure line becomes blocked?
They continue to operate normally because they are only fed by static pressure.

9. What is the working principle of the vertical speed indicator?
It compares the ambient static pressure with a delayed static pressure, due to a metering unit, fed inside the instrument case.

10. What happens to the airspeed indicator when the static pressure line is blocked?
The ASI will show an under-read during a climb and an over-read during a descent.

11. What does an altimeter consist of?
It consists in an instrument case fed with static pressure that has a partially evacuated aneroid capsule inside it. As the aircraft climbs or descents, the capsule will expand/contract, giving us the altitude.

12. What are the variables of gyroscopic rigidity?
Gyroscopic rigidity varies with rotational speed, mass and mass distribution.

13. What are the 2 most important and noticeable errors on a direct reading compass and what should we do to counter them?
There are turning errors and acceleration errors In the acceleration we need to take into account the error and be aware that when accelerating there is an apparent turn to North and when Decelerating we have an apparent turn to South. When turning we also have those errors and have to keep in mind that we Undershoot when turning North and we Overshoot when turning South.

14. Why are the static ports on an airplane perpendicular to the airflow?
So that they can read the static pressure without influence of the aircraft’s motion (dynamic pressure).

15. Why is the pitot tube placed at a distance from the fuselage?
The pitot is placed at a distance to be away from the airflow disturbances caused by the aircraft’s body.

16. How does the airspeed indicator work ?
The airspeed indicator works by measuring the pressure difference between the pitot tube (which senses ram air pressure) and the static port (which senses ambient air pressure). This differential pressure is converted into KIAS (knots indicated airspeed) and displayed on the instrument. The indicator is color-coded with arcs representing operating speed ranges: C172N: White arc (41 to 85 knots), green arc (47 to 128 knots), yellow arc (128 to 160 knots), and a red radial line (160 knots). C172R: White arc (33 to 85 knots), green arc (44 to 129 knots), yellow arc (129 to 163 knots), and a red radial line (163 knots). The instrument incorporates a true airspeed (TAS) window, allowing TAS to be read directly from the face of the dial. Additionally, there is a window at the six o’clock position that displays true airspeed and a window at the twelve o’clock position that displays pressure altitude overlaid with a temperature scale. To determine true airspeed: - Identify the current pressure altitude and outside air temperature (OAT). - Rotate the lower-left knob to align the pressure altitude with the OAT on the scale. - Read the resulting true airspeed from the indicated window.

17. How does the attitude indicator work ?
The attitude indicator shows the aircraft’s pitch and bank relative to the horizon. It uses a vacuum-powered gyroscope mounted horizontally, which maintains rigidity in space, allowing the instrument to reflect the plane's movement around it. The gyro is spun by suction from an engine-driven vacuum pump. The instrument displays a miniature airplane against a fixed horizon bar; as the aircraft pitches or banks, the miniature moves accordingly. A curved scale above the horizon bar marks standard bank angles (10°, 20°, 30°, and 60°) for reference. Though reliable, the instrument can experience precession—minor errors caused by prolonged turns or abrupt maneuvers. These usually self-correct in straight-and-level flight but highlight the need for cross-checking with other instruments.

18. How does the altimeter work ?
The altimeter measures altitude by sensing atmospheric pressure, which decreases as altitude increases. Inside the instrument is a sealed, flexible aneroid barometer (a stack of wafers) that expands or contracts in response to changes in external air pressure. These movements are mechanically linked to needles on the altimeter face, which indicate the aircraft’s altitude above sea level. As the aircraft climbs and air pressure drops, the wafers expand, moving the needles to show a higher altitude. During descent, increasing pressure causes the wafers to compress, and the indicated altitude decreases. The altimeter typically uses three needles to display altitude: a needle for tens of thousands of feet, a medium-length needle for thousands, and a long needle for hundreds. To maintain accuracy, the pilot adjusts the altimeter using the Kollsman window, which sets the current barometric pressure. This setting is usually given in hectopascals (hPa) in Portugal and Europe (e.g., 1013.2 hPa), and in inches of mercury (in. Hg) in countries like the United States (e.g., 29.92 in. Hg). Setting the correct pressure ensures the altimeter properly reflects altitude rather than changes caused by weather systems.

19. What are the errors associated with the altimeter ?
Though reliable, the altimeter can give incorrect readings if the pressure setting is wrong or if weather-related pressure changes are not accounted for. When transitioning from a high-pressure system to a low-pressure system, if the altimeter pressure setting is not adjusted, the instrument will overread, indicating a higher altitude than the actual one. Conversely, when moving from a low-pressure system to a high-pressure system without updating the altimeter, it will underread, suggesting you are at a lower altitude than you truly are. To help remember these concepts, consider these handy phrases: "From high to low, lookout below." "From low to high, lookout to the sky." These sayings serve as reminders to adjust your altimeter when pressure changes, ensuring accurate altitude readings during flight.

20. How does the turn coordinator work ?
The Turn Coordinator is an instrument that helps understand two things during a turn: the rate at which the aircraft is turning and whether the turn is coordinated, meaning balanced and properly controlled with both aileron and rudder. Inside the Turn Coordinator, there is a small, electrically powered gyroscope that spins rapidly. The gyroscope is mounted at an angle — specifically, canted upward at about 30 degrees — which allows it to sense both yaw (side-to-side motion of the nose) and a small amount of roll (banking motion of the wings). When the aircraft begins to turn, the yaw motion causes the spinning gyroscope to experience a force called gyroscopic precession. This force causes the gyro’s housing to move, and that motion is mechanically linked to a pointer on the instrument face. As the aircraft turns, this pointer banks in the direction of the turn. If it aligns with the white tick marks on the dial, the aircraft is turning at a standard rate of 3 degrees per second, which would complete a full 360-degree turn in two minutes. Beneath the main display is a small curved tube with a metal ball inside — this is called the inclinometer, or simply “the ball.” It shows whether the aircraft is in a coordinated turn. When the airplane is turning correctly, the ball stays in the center. If the airplane is slipping (too little rudder), the ball moves to the inside of the turn. If the airplane is skidding (too much rudder), the ball moves to the outside. Pilots correct this by using the rudder — applying pressure to the pedal on the same side the ball has moved to, following the rule: "step on the ball."

21. What's the function of the alternate static air control?
If the external static air source is giving erroneous signals to instruments such as the altimeter due to ice or other obstruction, we should open this valve to use the air from the cabin.

22. How do dead reckon your TAS?
IAS +2% for each 1000' of altitude.

23. How do you calculate a standard rate?
15% of your TAS

24. What is the anticipation you should give to return to level flight?
1/3 of the bank angle

25. Describe the different types of pressure.
Total pressure: is the pressure sensed in a closed tube that faces directly into the airflow. This is what de pitot tube senses Static pressure: is the pressure that acts in all direction. It is measure ate 90º to the airflow. This is what is sensed in the static port next to the pilot door. Dynamic pressure: is the speed, is the difference between the total pressure and the static pressure. Total pressure= Dynamic pressure + Static pressure

26. What happens to the ASI if there is a blockage on the pitot line?
When descending at constant speed, the pressure inside the capsule no longer changes, but the static pressure continues to increase. The capsule compresses, causing the ASI to under-read or show decreasing airspeed. When climbing at constant speed, the capsule pressure no longer changes but the static pressure in the case continues to reduce. The ASI shows an increasing airspeed with constant speed.

27. What are the type of speeds?
Indicated Airspeed (IAS): airspeed indiacted on the ASI Calibrated Airspeed (CAS): is the IAS corrected for instrument error and any predictable pressure errors. Equivalent Airspeed (EAS): is the CAS corrected for compressibility error. Provides the most accurate indication of dynamic pressure. A slower speeds IAS, CAS and EAS are either the same or differ by only a few knots. But at high speed the difference between CAS and EAS becomes noticeable. True Airspeed (TAS): is the speed of the aircraft through the air. TAS is EAS corrected for density error.

28. What happens to the altimeter when the pitot line becomes blocked?
Nothing, because the only input into the altimeter is static pressure.

29. What is the IDENT button?
The IDENT button is pressed whenever the radar controller requests the pilot to A special reply pulse is transmitted by the transponder to the interrogating ground station, which causes a special symbol to appear for a few Matilde Malheiro MMR 24011 Pedro Teixeira PDT 24011 Agosto 2025 seconds on the radar screen alongside the normal return from your aircraft, thus allowing positive identification by the radar controller.

30. What are the transponder modes?
Mode 3/A: the basic transponder type, with 4096 different codes selectable by the pilot Mode C: the same codes as Mode 3/A sets, plus an automatic altitude reporting capability (provided the aircraft is fitted with an enconding altimeter, or a blind encoder). This sends altitude information to the controller based on 29.92 in. Hg regardless of what the pilot has set in the pressure window. Mode S: The reply includes the squawk code, pressure altitude, and other information and capabilities.

31. Define: course, heading, drift, bearing, variation, deviation, relative bearing.
Course (C): projection on the earth surface of the trajectory of an aircraft, expressed in degrees with respect to geographical north (True course) or magnetic north (magnetic course). Heading: direction of the aircraft´s longitudinal axis, relative to the geographical north (True Heading), magnetic north (Magnetic Heading) or compass north (Compass Heading), expressed in degrees. In other words, heading is the direction in which the aircraft is pointing. Variation (V): angle formed between the magnetic and geographic meridians. It´s positive (+) when the magnetic north is to the east of the geographical north, and negative (-) when the magnetic north is to the west of the geographical north. Deviation (D): error of the indications of the magnetic compass produced by magnetic disturbances originated by the structure and electrical components of the aircraft. It´s positive (+) if it´s east, and negative (-) if it´s west. Drift: angle between the heading and the track, due to crosswind. It´s the same value as the wind correction angle (WCA) but opposite sign. Bearing: direction to/from a station, from/to an aircraft, respectively. It is an angle whose sides are formed by any of the following elements: a magnetic or geographic meridian, the longitudinal axis of the airplane or the line connecting the aircraft with a ground station. Relative Bearing: angle between the longitudinal axis of the aircraft with the line connecting the airplane and the station.

32. Beyond a direct reading of speed, what indirect information does the Airspeed Indicator (ASI) provide?
Beyond a direct reading of indicated speed, the Airspeed Indicator (ASI) provides indirect information about the aircraft's pitch. Specifically, at low airspeeds, the nose is typically up, and at high speeds, the nose will be down.

33. What properties does a gyroscope have?
Gyroscopes rely on two main properties: - Rigidity in Space: Once spinning, a gyroscope resists changes to its orientation in space. Even if the aircraft pitches, rolls, or yaws, the gyroscope maintains its original plane of rotation. Instruments such as the attitude indicator and heading indicator use this principle to display reliable information about the aircraft’s orientation. - Precession: When a force is applied to a spinning gyroscope, it reacts 90 degrees from the point of force application in the direction of rotation. This phenomenon, called precession, is used in the turn coordinator to indicate the rate and direction of turns. As the aircraft begins a turn, the gyroscopic instrument tilts according to the applied force, allowing it to display the aircraft's rate of turn accurately.


POF
1. What happens to the stall speed when the CG is in a FWD position?
The stall speed increases because the aircraft requires a higher angle of attack to maintain level flight bringing the wings closer to its critical angle of attack.

2. What is the difference between fuel consumption when the CG is in a forward position compared to an aft position?
When the CG is in a FWD position, the aircraft requires a greater nose-up elevator deflection thus increasing drag and fuel consumption. When the CG is in an AFT position, the aircraft requires less nose-up elevator deflection which causes a decrease in drag and in fuel consumption.

3. How do you describe the stability and maneuverability with CG change
A forward CG increases stability and decreases maneuverability because the arm between the CG and the horizontal and vertical stabilizer is bigger, resulting in more leverage in the control surfaces. On the other hand, a higher force by the pilot to move the controls is necessary making it less maneuverable. An aft CG decreases stability and increases maneuverability because the arm between the CG and the horizontal and vertical stabilizer is smaller, resulting in less leverage in the control surfaces. On the other hand, less force is required by the pilot in order to move the controls, making it more maneuverable.

4. What does a reversible flight control system mean?
It means that a movement on the flight control surface will result on a movement on the pilots’ controls.

5. What is the meaning of Vref?
It is the speed in a specified landing configuration at the point where the airplane descends through 50 ft.

6. What happens to the stall speed with higher flap settings?
The stall speed decreases because the flaps lift generating capabilities allow for a lower speed while maintaining the same lift.

7. What is the meaning of Va?
It is the maximum speed at which a full deflection in the controls can be made without exceeding the load factor.

8. What are the different types of drag?
There are two types of drag, parasite and induced drag. Induced drag is a consequence of lift and is produce by the passage of the aerofoil through the air while parasite drag results in the air resistance caused by the surfaces of the airplane that do not produce lift (landing gear, spoilers);

9. What is the difference between laminar and turbulent flow in the boundary layer?
Turbulent flow has a higher speed, it is thicker and creates more skin friction drag than the laminar flow. Since the turbulent flow has more energy due to a higher speed, it is more resistant to the separation of the boundary layer.

10. Why is it important to not use Ailerons at or near the stall?
Use of ailerons can enhance the stall, increasing the AOA of the wing, stalling it, leading it to a wing drop.

11. On a constant speed propeller, what setting causes the most drag on the airplane.
The propeller setting that causes the most drag on the airplane is fine pitch.

12. What is the meaning of the helix angle?
It is the angle between the propeller plane of rotation and the relative airflow.

13. What are the propeller turning tendencies ?
While creating the thrust necessary to push the aircraft forward, propellers also create negative tendencies that must be countered in certain flight phases. Propellers unwanted effects are : - Torque - Spiraling slipstream - P-factor - Gyroscopic Precession

14. What is propeller torque ?
Propeller torque is based on the principle that for every action there is an equal opposite reaction. So as the propeller rotates clockwise, the aircraft will want to rotate counter-clockwise with the same intensity, this effect is known as torque reaction. The overall amount of torque reaction felt depends on the mass of the propeller, its speed and the thrust produced, the greater those variables are the greater the torque reaction produced. This effect is particularly noticeable during the take-off roll.

15. What is the spiraling slipstream ?
When a propeller is rotating it modifies the airflow around it generating a slipstream flowing backwards and rotating in the same direction as the propeller. When travelling backwards the slipstream hits the vertical stabiliser, because it meets with an angle and the vertical stabiliser is an aerofoil it causes an aerodynamic force. The aerodynamic force acts around the aircraft CoG causing the aircraft to develop a tendency to yaw left (for CW rotating propellers). This effect varies with speed, as speed increases the slipstream straightens out causing the yawing moment to reduce. This tendency is particularly noticeable when the aircraft uses high power settings at low speeds.

16. What is P-factor ?
When the aircraft is at high angles of attack as during slow flight, the right half of the propeller disc produces more thrust. This difference in thrust is explained by the fact that due to the propeller inclination the down-going blade must cover a greater distance and has a higher speed than the up-going blade causing it to produce more thrust, also because of this speed variation the propeller has different AoA along the blades. This tendency is particularly noticeable at high power settings and high angles of attack, when climbing at low speed after take-off for example.

17. What is gyroscopic precession ?
This tendency is based on the principle that any rotating mass has gyroscopic properties such as rigidity and precession. Due to this principle any force that is applied perpendicular to the propeller will precess through 90°.

18. What are the forces acting on a propeller ?
A propeller blade produces an aerodynamic force the same way a wing produces it. On a propeller blade we can observe the following forces : Normal Reaction → The aerofoil shape of the propeller blade generates an aerodynamic force perpendicular to the relative airflow. This force acts at an angle to the airflow, contributing to the thrust.This force varies depending on the angle of attack of the blade, which can change with the RPM and TAS of the aircraft. Thrust → The primary purpose of the propeller is to generate thrust by accelerating air backward.This force acts along the axis of the propeller, at right angle with the plane of rotation.The thrust force is generated by the pressure differential between the front (leadingedge) and the rear (trailing edge) of the propeller blades. Torque Drag → It arises due to the twisting moment (torque) required to turn the propeller. When the engine drives the propeller, it imparts rotational motion to the blades, which requires energy. As the blades cut through the air, they produce aerodynamic forces (thrust and lift), but these forces also create resistance in the form of drag (profile + induced). Shaft Torque → It is the rotational force applied to the propeller by the engine via the driveshaft. This is the direct force required to rotate the propeller blades, and it is a function of the power output of the engine and the propeller’s design. Shaft torque is the moment that drives the propeller to rotate. Centrifugal Force → The rotating propeller blade experiences centrifugal force due to its rotation. This forceacts outward from the center of rotation, attempting to stretch the blade away from its hub. The magnitude of this force increases with RPM. Centripetal Force → It acts on the propeller blades due to the rotation of the propeller. As the blades spin around the hub, they experience an inward-directed force that tends to pull them toward the center of rotation. This force is responsible for causing the blades to bend and flex, as they are subject to centrifugal forces acting outward from the hub.

19. How do these forces vary with TAS and RPMs ?
With RPMs : - As RPM increases, the tip speed of the propeller blades increases, which increases the thrust generated by the propeller (up to a certain point). This is because the propeller blades are moving through the air more quickly, resulting in a greater acceleration of the air and a higher pressure differential between the front and rear of the blades. - Centrifugal force also increases with RPM, placing more stress on the blade and increasing the potential for blade flexing. - The angle of attack of the blades may change, especially in variable-pitch propellers,affecting the lift and drag generated. A higher RPM can lead to a steeper angle of attack at higher speeds, which might lead to higher thrust production but also greater drag. With TAS : - As airplane speed increases, the relative velocity of the airflow over the propeller blades increases. This means that the angle of attack required to produce the same amount of thrust may decrease. Higher airspeeds generally result in lower AoA for a given thrust output, which can reduce the drag on the blades. - Induced drag decreases with increasing speed, as the airflow over the blades becomes more streamlined and the blades encounter less resistance. - For constant RPM, the propeller blades might be less effective at higher speeds, as the increase in relative airflow reduces the need for a higher angle of attack and lift generation. - Pitch Angle: At higher airspeeds, if the aircraft has a controllable-pitch propeller, the blades may automatically adjust their pitch to maintain an optimal angle of attack,reducing drag while maintaining thrust.

20. How is Lift generated on a conventional aerofoil ?
The total reaction is formed by a pressure differential acting over the wing, the magnitude of this force relies on the dynamic pressure of the airflow. The total reaction may be developed in 2 forces : - LIFT : Lift is the component of the total reaction force perpendicular to the relative airflow. - DRAG : Drag is the component of the total reaction force horizontal to the relative airflow. Lift can be written as an equation : L =1/2 p V²SCl The Lift Coefficient gives us the amount of lift produced per unit area and per unit dynamic pressure, It depends on the following aerofoil characteristics : - AoA : Increasing the AoA will result in increasing the pressure differential around the aerofoil and thus the Lift up until Clmax where we reach AoAcrit and the stalling angle causing a decrease in Lift. - Thickness : It allows for the Clmax to be higher allowing us a more important increase in Lift using the AoA previously covered.  - Camber : It will cause the aerofoil to have the ability to produce lift at 0° AoA by causing an increase in the airflow velocity and thus dynamic pressure. AoAcrit remains the same and in order to produce 0 Lift the associated AoA is negative. - Flaps : Camber is also affected by the use of flaps. Using flaps causes the AoA to increase as the chord line changes. The use of flaps allows for Clmax to increase but the AoAcrit reduces

21. What is the 3D airflow affecting an aerofoil ?
We can observe a span wise flow acting on the aerofoil, this flow is affected by : - The air mass flow inertia - Local Pressure differences around the aircraft The flow speed will entirely depends on the pressure gradient of the aerofoil Wing Tip Vortex → We can determine that on an aerofoil developing Lift we have a relatively low pressure on the top surface of the wing due to the flow acceleration and a relatively high pressure on the wing lower surface. As we know the tendency is for the air to flow from the higher pressure to the lower pressure, because of this tendency at the wing tip the airflow underneath the wing will whip around the wing tip to the lower pressure. As the aircraft is moving and this isn't a static situation this creates a vortex as the wing flow the air starts to rotate. This process occurs at both wingtips and the air flows towards the aircraft (Left wing to the Right and Right wing to the Left). Factors affecting Vortex intensity : - Pressure differential : The greater the press diff the greater the lift produced and thus the greater the intensity of the vortex. No press diff No Vortex. - Time to act on the airflow : Because air as inertia it takes a definite force to cause an acceleration, we can say that a slow-moving wing will produce more intense vortex as it as more time to act on the air while a fast-moving wing will produce less intense vortex as it has less time to act on the airflow. - Aspect Ratio : when the chord is long it has more time to affect the airflow causing more intense vortex while a narrower chord will not affect the air during enough time to cause intense vortex. Effects of wing tip vortex : - Downwash : As each wingtip vortex is rotating downwards it drags the surrounding air with it. - Drag : A vortex creates a large rotational energy that is provided by the aircraft and felt as drag. - Wake : Vortex are highly energetic flows and can reach rotations of 300’/s being a severe hazard for lighter aircrafts. SpanWise Flow → We can also observe a pressure gradient acting along the wing. This gradient isn’t as strong as the wing tip vortices. As we previously stated we find a relatively lower pressure on the top of the wing and a slightly higher pressure below the wing. The most intense area of high/low pressure depending on the side of the wing is found at the root, this causes a flow to develop span wise from the root to the tip underneath the wing and from the tip to the root on the top of the wing. This spanwise flow causes trailing edge vortices when those 2 flows meet at an angle at the trailing edge. Their strength will depend on the angle at which they meet, furthermore the trailing edge vortices closer to the wing tip add strength to the wing tip vortices creating more downwash. Effective Airflow → A wing operates in a 3d airflow, this is an airflow that has horizontal and vertical velocities. The combination of those velocities creates the effective airflow that is at an angle with the relative airflow. This effective airflow is the one that determines the wing aerodynamic forces.

22. What is Induced drag and what factors affect it ?
Because the aerodynamic force is determined by the effective airflow as stated previously and because this airflow is at an angle with the relative airflow the difference between the two is the induced AoA. Whenever Lift is created, induced drag is also produced by the wing. Induced drag depends on the lift produced and the intensity of the wing tip vortices causing downwash, increasing the angle difference between EAF/RAF and thus increasing the induced AoA. Induced AoA is the angle between the EAF/RAF and depends on the following : - TAS : lower TAS, higher vortices, more downwash, higher induced AoA, higher induced drag - VS caused by the downwash : more downwash, higher induced AoA, higher induced drag Factors Influencing Induced Drag are the following : Speed → Induced drag is inversely proportional to speed² - Increase in speed : Increasing speed causes a reduction in Cl for the same amount of L produced, this causes a reduction in the press gradient causing less wing tip vortices, less downwash and thus less induced drag. - Decrease in speed : Decreasing speed causes an increase in Cl for the same amount of L produced, this causes an increase in the press. gradient causing more wing tip vortices, more downwash and thus more induced drag. Weight →Induced drag is proportional to weight - Increase in weight : More weight requires more Lift to be produced, it requires a higher press diff, causing more wing tip vortices, more downwash and thus more induced drag - Decrease in weight : Less weight requires less Lift to be produced, it requires a lower press diff, causing less wing tip vortices, less downwash and thus less induced drag Maneuvers & load factor → A maneuver requires more Lift to be produced in order to balance the weight and the forces caused by the maneuver. More lift requires a higher press diff, causing more wing tip vortices, more downwash and thus more induced drag. Aspect Ratio → Induced drag is inversely proportional to AR - High AR : Smaller vortices created, causing less downwash and thus less induced drag. - Low AR : Greater vortices created, causing more downwash and thus more induced drag.

23. What is stability ?
Equilibrium is a state where the sum of all the forces and moments acting on an aircraft are 0. Small upsets act on the balance of these forces and moments causing the aircraft to depart from equilibrium changing the size of the lift force produced. Stability is the capacity for an aircraft to produce restoring moments in order to automatically bring back the aircraft to a state of equilibrium. An ideal aircraft is stable and responsive but those characteristics oppose each other, the more stable the less responsive and inversely. We consider two types of stability : - Static Stability, referring to the immediate response of an object when displaced from equilibrium - Dynamic Stability, referring to the subsequent response over time Within Static Stability we can find : Positive Static Stability → The object has a tendency to go back to equilibrium after being disturbed even if it may not reach equilibrium. Neutral Static Stability → The object acquires the state after being disturbed it doesn’t go back nor diverge from equilibrium. Negative Static Stability → The object has a tendency to diverge from equilibrium never returning to its initial position. Within Dynamic Stability we can find : Positive Dynamic Stability → - Periodic motion : The object will overshoot equilibrium before returning towards it, this tendency damps with time. The greater the damping force the greater the positive dynamic stability - Aperiodic motion : The object will return to equilibrium steadily without oscillating around it. Neutral Dynamic Stability → - Periodic motion : The object will oscillate but suffers from no damping forces, it never reaches equilibrium but nor is it diverging from it. - Aperiodic motion : The object does not oscillate but never reaches equilibrium nor diverges from it. Negative Dynamic Stability → - Periodic motion : The object oscillates and it increasingly diverges from equilibrium over time. - Aperiodic motion : The object steadily diverges from the equilibrium.

24. What is a stall and what are the factors affecting it ?
In order to maintain level flight at low speed you must increase the AoA in order to increase the Cl, but as the AoA/Cl increase it reaches a point where the airflow is not longer able to overcome the steepening angle and adverse press grad causing it to lose energy up to a point where a significant amount of energy is lost and the airflow separates from the wing causing the wing to stall. At positive AoA the stagnation point on the LE of the wing sits below the LE air that has to bend around it to flow over the wing upper surface. As AoA increases this stagnation point moves further below and the airflow has to overcome a tighter turn in order for it to flow over the upper surface this causes the airflow to lose consequent energy. Also at high AoA the adverse press grad is greatest due to the greater press diff on the wing. When the AoA increases the adverse press grad covers more distance over the upper wing while it increases in strength, this causes the separation point to move fwd and consequently less distance is available for the airflow to produce lift. Factors affecting stall : Weight → As an aircraft is heavier it needs more Lift to counterbalance the weight. To that it either need to fly faster or at a higher AoA. But as the wing stalls at the same AoAcrit so weight is going to affect Vs. As it needs to fly faster the Vs will also be higher so we can say that Vs varies proportionally with Vs². Altitude → At high altitude we encounter a significant reduction in density, this increases the difference between EAS/TAS. At the higher TAS the air has less time to change direction approaching the wing this causes huge energy loss weakening the ability of the air to overcome the wing adverse pressure gradient causing a stall at a lower AoAcrit and also at a higher Vs. Load Factor → Considering a steep turn, load factor > 1 and thus the Lift produced is also higher meaning we have more pressure difference on the wing this also means that we have a steeper adverse pressure gradient for the airflow to overcome. Because the air has the same energy but tries to overcome a steeper gradient it loses energy at a higher rate causing it to separate at higher speeds. Flaps → The use of flaps allows us to increase the wing Clmax and to fly slower while still having a margin above the stall. The use of flaps allow us to reduce Vs but also reduces our AoAcrit meaning we can fly slower but we stall at a lower AoA as flaps increase the wing AoA. Slats → The use of slats allows us to compensate for the effects of the flaps and reduce our AoAcrit as slats modify the flow around the wing. The suction peak is reduced allowing a lower adverse pressure gradient causing the wing to stall a higher AoA and achieve a greater Clmax.

25. What is the difference between Vx and Vy ?
Vx → Best Angle of Climb Speed : allows for a steeper climb. Vy → Best Angle of Climb Speed : allows for a steeper climb. For Vx, we want to maximise our excess thrust. The excess thrust is defined by Thrust - (Drag+Wsiny), this allows us to increase our climb angle up to a maximum while maintaining airspeed. In practice, this is done to clear obstacles closer to our departure path. For Vy, we want to maximise our excess power. The excess power is defined by Power Available - Power Required, this allows for the engine to produce the maximum power in order to maintain airspeed and to gain altitude quickly. In practice, this is done to reach cruise altitude as quickly as possible.

26. What is the best gliding speed and what is it used for ?
Best glide speed is the airspeed at which an aircraft can travel the furthest distance forward while losing the least amount of altitude, making it the most efficient speed for gliding when there is no engine power available. Flying at this speed allows the aircraft to make the best use of its altitude to reach a safe landing area, as published in the aircraft’s manual based on its aerodynamic design. This speed can vary slightly with aircraft weight, requiring a higher glide speed for heavier loads to maintain the best glide ratio. Wind conditions also play a role: flying slightly faster into a headwind or slightly slower with a tailwind helps optimize distance. Crucially, flying faster or slower than the best glide speed will reduce the maximum distance you can cover, as both excess drag from higher speeds and increased sink rate from slower speeds will decrease overall gliding efficiency. Best glide speed is always flown in a clean configuration, with landing gear and flaps retracted unless specified otherwise, and is essential knowledge for emergency situations.

27. Why is the propeller blade twisted?
The propeller blade is twisted along its length to maintain a constant blade angle of attack.

28. What are the disadvantages of a fixed-pitch propeller?
The disadvantage of a fixed-pitch propeller is that it only produces its maximum efficiency (i.e., best blade angle/pitch for rpm speed) at one predetermined engine rpm, altitude, and forward airspeed condition. This is so because the forward airspeed affects the blade angle of attack (an increase in forward airspeed causes a decrease in blade angle of attack, which reduces the rearward air displacement and thereby decreases the thrust produced), and therefore, propeller efficiency is reduced away from its single predetermined condition. Therefore, for a fixed-pitch propeller, a single setting must be made between the blade angle (and therefore the angle of attack and pitch) desirable for takeoff and that required for cruise conditions. And if a blade angle for high-speed cruise is chosen (coarse), then the aircraft has the disadvantage of poor propeller performance for takeoff, and vice versa.

29. What is the center of pressure?
The center of pressure is represented as a single point acting on the wing chord line at a right angle to the relative airflow, through which the wing’s lifting force is produced.

30. What is the washout?
Is the reduction of the angle of incidence from the root to the tip.

31. What is the formula for lift?
1/2 rho * V² *S* Cl

32. Explain why an aircraft stalls.
An aircraft stalls when the streamlined/laminar airflow (or boundary layer) over the wing’s upper surface, which produces lift, breaks away from the surface when the critical angle of attack is exceeded, irrespective of airspeed, and becomes turbulent, causing a loss in lift (i.e., the turbulent air on the upper surface creates a higher air pressure than on the lower surface). The only way to recover is to decrease the angle of attack (i.e., relax the back pressure and/or move the control column forward).


PERF
1. Why shouldn’t we use a higher flap setting during the landings in case of strong crosswind?
Since the flaps allow us to fly the approach at lower speeds, the airplane controls become less effective. So, in strong crosswinds, a lower flap setting will allow for a higher approach speed and therefore increase the control effectiveness.

2. What happens to the take-off distance and climb performance if flaps 10 are used instead of flaps UP?
Take-off distance will decrease and climb performance will decrease due to an increase in drag.

3. What happens to the landing distance with an increase in temperature and pressure altitude?
The landing distance increases because in order to maintain sufficient lift in a lowdensity environment, the approach speed needs to be higher.

4. What is the screen height and what is the value for class B aircraft?
Screen height is an imaginary screen placed at the end of the TODR and at the beginning of the LDR. It corresponds to 50 ft in both landing and take-off for class B aircraft.

5. What is the performance class for a C172 and why?
It is a performance class B aircraft because it has a capacity of 9 passengers or less and a MTOM of 5700kg or less.

6. What is the most efficient propeller setting for cruise flight?
The most efficient setting is coarse pitch. It is better for high-speed flight and creates less drag.

7. What propeller setting is most suitable for take-off?
The setting normally used for take-off is fine pitch because it generates a high amount of thrust due to a larger blade angle.

8. What is the purpose of a feathered propeller?
This setting increases the propeller angle of pitch, making the blades parallel to the air flow. This reduces the drag caused by the stopped propeller in case of an engine failure in flight.

9. What does service ceiling mean?
Service ceiling the highest altitude an aircraft can maintain a steady climb rate of at least 100 feet per minute.


CHARTS
1. What is the Jeppesen chart index number of related to on-going constructions on the aerodrome?
10-8 charts

2. What is QFU?
Magnetic bearing of the runway in use.

3. What is the chart index number of the charts related to radar minimum altitudes?
10-1R

4. What is the MAA and how can it be identified on a chart?
It is a published altitude representing the maximum usable altitude or flight level for an airspace structure or route segment. Will be identified by the prefix “MAA”.

5. What is the meaning of MEA?
The MEA is the Minimum En-Route Altitude and Is the Altitude for an en-route segment that provides adequate reception of relevant navigation facilities and ATS communications, complies with the airspace structure and provides the required obstacle clearance.

6. What is the meaning of a leading radial?
The radial in an arc DME in which a turn to intercept the inbound course should be initiated.


SOP / EAN
1. According to EAN SOP stabilization criteria, what are the requirements to be stabilized on the approach?
(a) Aircraft in trim. (b) Landing Configuration obtained. (c) Power stabilized above idle. (1) VOR/NDB +/-5°, GNSS within half scale deflection. (2) On the published vertical profile (d) VAPP maintained: (1) Nominated approach speed +10/-0 KIAS. (e) Bank angle <15°. (f) V/S <1000’/min. (g) Checklists and briefings completed.

2. According to EAN SOP, at what height must the stabilization criteria be met?
(a) 1000’ HAT for instrument conditions. (b) 500’ HAT for straight in visual conditions. (c) 300’ HAT for circling or visual traffic pattern.

3. How can we identify if the altimeters are unserviceable?
According to EAN SOP, if the difference is greater than 60’, (2 mb) between the published aerodrome elevation and the reading with the local QNH and in a case of the aircraft being equipped with two altimeters the difference between both of them is greater than 120’ the altimeters are unserviceable.

4. According to EAN SOP, when flying NPA how many feet should we add to the MDA and why?
When flying LNAV add 40’ buffer to avoid descending below the MDA during the first phase of the missed approach procedure. For instance, in the LPVZ VOR/DME X 36, the published MDA is 2430' but the derived DA minimums should be 2470’.

5. According to EAN SOP, what are the steps to follow before beginning an approach?
Meteorology (ATIS if available), Performance calculations (FOLD), Charts (Radar vector, STAR, App, Ground), Setup and Briefing.

6. According to EAN SOP, what are the two types of approach configuration techniques?
Early stabilized 2D – 1NM before FAF Decelerated 3D – GS or VDEV at 1 dot from intercept 3D – 1500 AAL

7. Which variants of the Cessna 172 are in the Nortavia Fleet ?
Nortavia currently owns 4 different C172 variants: - Cessna R172K, Registration: CS-AYC - Cessna 172N, Registration: CS-DCU - Cessna 172R, Registration: CS-DGM, CS-DGS, CS-EDS - Cessna 172S, Registration: EC-LGJ, D-ERKS, SE-MBN

8. What are the principal dimensions of the Cessna C172 ?
Wingspan: - CR172K and C172N - 36 Inches (10,97 meters) - C172R and C172S - 36 Inches and 1 feet (11,00 meters) Length: - C172N - 26 Inches and 11 feet (8,20 meters) - C172R, C172S and CR172K - 27 Inches and 2 feet (8,28 meters) Height: - CR172K and C172N - 8 inches and 9,5 feet (3,10 meters) - C172R and C172S - 8 inches and 11 feet (3,56 meters) Wheelbase: - All types - 65 Inches (1,65 meters) Propeller ground clearance: - C172N, C172R and C172S - 11,25 Inches (0,29 meters) - CR172K - 10,25 Inches (0,26 meters)

9. What are the main differences between the 4 different variants ?
Engine and propeller: - C172N - 160 HP, Carburetor equipped, fixed pitch propeller; - C172R - 160 HP, Fuel injected, fixed pitch propeller; - C172S - 180 HP, Fuel injected, fixed pitch propeller; - CR172K - 195 HP, Fuel injected, variable pitch propeller; Oil Quantity: - C172N - 6 Quarts - C172R,C172S and CR172K - 8 Quarts MTOW-Maximum take-off weight: - C172N - 2.300 lbs (1.043 kgs) - C172R - 2.450 lbs (1.111 kgs) - C172S and CR172K - 2.550 lbs (1.157kgs) Fuel Capacity: - C172N - Total 43 USG (163 L), usable 40 USG (151 L) - 172R and C172S - Total 56 USG (212 L), usable 53 USG (201 L) - CR172K - 52 USG (197L), usable 49 USG (185 L)

10. Lost Comms Procedures
(a) Visual Meteorological Conditions (VMC) (1) Continue to fly in VMC, land at the nearest suitable aerodrome; and report the arrival to the appropriate air traffic services unit (unless a pilot considers it inadvisable to complete the flight according to this rules). (2) Set transponder code #7600. (b) Instrument Meteorological Conditions (IMC) (1) Set transponder code #7600. (2) in airspace without radar coverage: Maintain the last assigned speed and level, or minimum flight altitude if higher, for a period of 20 minutes following the aircraft's failure to report its position over a compulsory reporting point and thereafter adjust level and speed in accordance with the filed flight plan. (3) In Airspace with radar coverage: Maintain the last assigned speed and level, or minimum flight altitude if higher, for a period of 7 minutes after: (i) the time the last assigned level or minimum flight altitude is reached; or (ii) the time the transponder is set to code #7600; or (iii) the aircraft's failure to report its position over a compulsory reporting point. whichever is later, and thereafter adjust level and speed in accordance with the filed flight plan. 65 (4) when radar vectored or offset: Rejoin current flight plan route no later than the next significant point. (c) Further steps (1) Proceed according to the current flight plan route to the appropriate designated navigation aid or fix serving the destination aerodrome. (2) Hold if necessary, over this aid until the expected approach time last received and acknowledged or as close as possible to, the estimated time of arrival resulting from the current flight plan. (3) Complete a normal instrument approach procedure as specified for the designated navigation aid or fix land, if possible, within 30 minutes after the estimated time of arrival or the last acknowledged expected approach time, whichever is later. What to expect from ATC: “ASSIST” principle: - Acknowledge the RCF, determine if it is a partial or complete Radio Communication Failure (RCF). - Separate the aircraft (accordingly, identified vs. unknown traffic) and if necessary, allow long final, keep the active runway clear of departures, arrivals, and vehicles. - Silence the non-urgent calls (as required), look for means to establish possible relay by other stations. - Inform the supervisor and all concerned Air Traffic Controller (ATC) units as well as airport authorities at the destination or alternative aerodrome. - Support the flight by transmitting blind and providing any information considered necessary such as type of approach, runway length and aerodrome details, etc. - Time provided for the crew to assess the situation and adhere to the RCF procedures

11. Nortávia Fuel and Oil Policy
For the Cessna 172K, 172R, and 172S models, the engin/e oil level should be maintained at 7.5 quarts and must never be allowed to fall below 7 quarts. In contrast, the Cessna 172N model requires a lower oil quantity; its oil level should be maintained at 5.6 quarts and must not be permitted to drop below 5 quarts. Regarding the fuel policy for the Cessna 172, for a VFR day local flight, the aircraft must have at least 60 liters (approximately 16 US gallons) of fuel. For a VFR navigation flight, the aircraft should have a full fuel quantity. For both VFR night flights and IFR flights, the fuel levels must comply with the relevant Part CAT regulations.

12. Altimeter Setting Policy
Once in the holding point of the airport, where the elevation of the threshold is indicated in the taxi chart (JEPPESEN 10-9 or 19-2), when the checklist reads adjust flight instruments: With ATC information: (a) Set the local QNH and check the altimeter reading. (b) If the difference between the reading and the QNH is less than 60’ (2 mb) set the QNH and neglect the altimeter error. (c) If the difference is greater than 60’, (2 mb) the altimeter is unserviceable. Without ATC information: (a) Set the QNH observing the elevation of the threshold depicted in the taxi chart. Aircraft equipped with two altimeters: (a) Set the QNH in both altimeters. The difference between both is greater than 120’ the altimeters are unserviceable. Aircraft equipped with KAP 140 autopilot: ( a) Set the QNH on the autopilot (BARO). Inflight procedures: a) When crossing the transition altitude set standard pressure. b) When cleared to descend to an altitude, set the local QNH.

13. What is the maximum duty period for students weekly?
32 flight time and 60 flight duty time

14. What is the minimum rest period?
10 hours

15. What is the time validity that should be covered on the NOTAM Pre-flight Information Bulletin (PIB)?
4 hours before and after the scheduled slot flight booking

16. What does the contingency fuel account for?
In the EAN’s case we use 15% of the trip fuel and accounts for unforeseen enroute factors. “Unforeseen factors are those which could have an influence on the fuel consumption to the destination aerodrome, such as deviations of an individual aeroplane from the expected fuel consumption data, deviation from forecast meteorological conditions, extended delays and deviations from planned routings and/or cruising levels.”

17. What does the final reserve fuel represent on EAN’s operation?
“Final reserve fuel/energy that shall be the amount of fuel/energy that is calculated at holding speed at 1 500ft (450 m) above the aerodrome elevation in standard conditions according to the aeroplane estimated mass on arrival at the destination alternate aerodrome, or destination aerodrome when no destination alternate aerodrome is required, and shall not be less, for aeroplanes with reciprocating engines, the fuel/energy to fly for 45 minutes.”

18. What are the mandatory on board student documents for every flight?
Aeronautical license (if you have any) or ANAC’s student card; EAN’s student card; Valid medical certificate; Spare glasses/contact lenses (if included in medical certificate); ID card or passport.

19. In which order and how are you supposed to brief each procedure/flight phase?
You should firstly brief yourself. Fully understand the procedure to be briefed, how you are going to fly it, visualise the plane flying the profile, and identify what instruments you will need, what threats and operational considerations affect you. Then proceed to brief the plane. Correctly set up equipment and avionics for the procedure to be flown. Followed by a briefing to the crew or yourself, out load, on solo flights. Identify threats and possible errors, the mitigation strategies you developed and then continue how are you going to fly the procedure. Brief yourself - Brief the plane - Brief everyone else (A good briefing is usually not a long briefing)

20. In case of missing QRH or checklist onboard may a flight be executed? In which conditions?
The flight may be executed if the following steps are taken: The instructor informs operations, a Safety Report is filled and an updated “study version” is onboard.

21. How are you supposed to perform altimeter setting changes inflight?
(a) When crossing the transition altitude, set standard pressure. (b) When cleared to descend to an altitude, set local QNH.

22. What are some situations when Limited Vision Devices (LTDs) are acceptable not to be used during an IFR flight phase?
Limited Vision Devices (LTDs) are acceptable not to be used during an IFR flight phase in the following situations: Take-off, landing. VFR departures and arrivals. Setup and briefing for approaches. Short break after an intense phase of maneuver training. Whenever deemed necessary for safety (e.g., traffic risk, terrain). In real IMC conditions

23. How is the bank angle calculated for flying an arc, and what is an easier technique for flying an arc?
The bank angle calculated for flying an arc is approximately 30 times the aircraft's turn radius (NM) divided by the arc's radius (NM from the station). The formula is Bank = 30 * TR / ARC. An easier technique for flying an arc is to fly short straight lines within 10 to 20 radials.

24. Under what conditions should an RNP APCH operation be discontinued?
An RNP APCH operation should be discontinued if the flight crew does not have sufficient visual reference to continue to a safe landing, or if any of the following occur: Navigation system failure is annunciated (e.g., warning flag). Lateral or vertical deviations exceed the tolerances. Loss of the on-board monitoring and alerting system Where vertical guidance is lost while the aircraft is still above 1 000 ft AGL, the flight crew may decide to continue the approach to LNAV minima, when supported by the navigation system. Change minimums and brief the differences.


RNAV
1. What characterizes the ILS?
It is a precision approach system that offers lateral and vertical guidance through the localizer and glide slope respectively. The ILS is also supplemented by range cues such as markers or a DME frequency paired to the LOC frequency.

2. What are the frequencies that the ILS uses?
The Localiser transmits in the VHF band with frequencies that vary between 108.00 MHz and 111.975 MHz The Glide Path transmits in UHF frequencies. The GP is paired with the VHF LOC frequency and is tunned automatically when the LOC frequency is tuned.

3. Where are the LOC and GS antennas located?
The LOC antenna is located at the stop-end of the runway and the GS antenna is located beyond the runway threshold, displaced to the side of the runway.

4. How does the Localiser work and what is the coverage?
The localizer transmits two lobes in the same VHF frequency, but each are modulated differently. The left lobe is modulated at 90 Hz while the right one is modulated at 150 Hz. The ILS reference line normally coincide with the runway centerline so when the aircraft in on the centerline, it receives an equal amount of 90 and 150 Hz modulation. If the aircraft receiver senses one signal more than the other it means that the aircraft is not on the centerline. To avoid the risk of a false LOC beam, there is a protected zone that guarantees signal without capturing false lobes. This coverage consists of: - +/- 10º of the runway centerline up to 25 nm; - +/- 35º of the centerline up to 17 nm;

5. How does the Glide Path of an ILS work?
The GS has a similar operating principle to the LOC. The GS antenna transmits two lobes in the same UHF carrier wave frequency, but each with a different modulation. The difference is that the GS antenna transmits a lower lobe that is amplitude modulated at 150 Hz and an upper lobe that is modulated at 90 Hz. When the aircraft receives an equal amount of modulation from both lobes, it means that the aircraft is on the Glide Path.

6. What is the coverage of the ILS GS?
The lateral coverage is +/- 8º either side of the runway centerline and it extends up to 10 NM.

7. What are the instruments that can be used to display an ILS?
An ILS can be displayed on a Course Deviation Indicator, Horizontal Situation Indicator and on modern PFD displays.

8. What is the ILS LOC and GS full-scale deflection in the display instrument?
- LOC +/- 2.5º - GS +/- 0.7º

9. What are the main ILS errors?
ILS signals can suffer from multi-path propagation, scalloping and beam bending. - Multi-path propagation - Caused by reflections from objects in the ILS coverage area. - Scalloping – Beam that oscillates either side of the extended centerline tracks, causing unexpected deviations. - Beam bends – Consistent angular and slightly curved deviation from the LOC or GP. - Side Lobes – Both LOC and GS lobes have multiple side lobes that can give false indications if captured.

10. What describes the ILS sensitive and critical areas?
The ILS critical area is the portion of land around the LOC and GS antennas where operations of aircraft or vehicles are prohibited during ILS operations. The ILS sensitive area is a larger portion of land that extends beyond the critical area around LOC and GS antennas where operations of aircraft and vehicles are controlled during ILS operations

11. What describes SBAS (Satellite Based Augmentation System)?
It is a system that improves the accuracy of the GPS signal by using processing stations on the ground that send corrections to geostationary satellites. These satellites then send the information to the aircraft.

12. What are the current SBAS systems compatible with NAVSTAR/GPS?
- EGNOS – European Geostationary Navigation Overlay System (Europe) - WAAS – Wide Area Augmentation System (USA) - MSAS – Multi Functional Satellite Augmentation System (Japan) - GAGAN – Geo and GPS Augmented Navigation (India)

13. What describes GBAS (Ground Based Satellite System)?
This system uses ground stations located in the vicinity of an airport to measure the position errors and send corrections to the aircraft via a VHF broadcast, improving its position accuracy. It can also be used to provide precision approach service.

14. What is the maximum angle were an entry to a PBN procedure can be made without the use of reversal procedures?
The angle shall not exceed 110 degrees.

15. What are the main types of RNP approaches?
LNAV – 2D approach that only provides lateral guidance. LNAV/VNAV – 3D approach that provides lateral and vertical guidance. Vertical guidance is provided by barometric sensors. LPV – 3D approach that also provides lateral and vertical guidance by using SBAS.

16. What is an ILS?
ILS (Instrument Landing System) provides both lateral and vertical guidance to aircraft during the approach and landing phases. These guidance signals are transmitted from ground-based facilities and interpreted onboard to display the aircraft's angular deviation from the ideal flight path. ILS can be supplemented with Marker Beacons or DME (Distance Measuring Equipment) to provide distance information in addition to lateral and vertical guidance. An ILS system consists of three main ground components : - LOC (Localizer):Provides lateral guidance. - GP (Glide Path): Provides vertical guidance. - Range: Typically provided by Marker Beacons or DME for distance measurement. ILS approaches are classified as precision approaches because they offer 3D guidance. They are categorized based on decision height (DH) and runway visual range (RVR) : - CAT I: DH > 200 ft, RVR > 550 m - CAT II: DH > 100 ft, RVR > 300 m - CAT III: DH ≥ 0 ft, RVR ≥ 0 m

17. What is a LOC ?
The Localizer (LOC) is the ILS component responsible for providing lateral guidance. It is positioned along the extended runway centerline at the stop end of the runway. The LOC transmitter emits two overlapping, lobe-shaped signals, with the midpoint between them defining the ILS reference line, the ideal lateral flight path. Both lobes are transmitted on the same VHF frequency, but with different amplitude modulations : - Right lobe: 150 Hz AM - Left lobe: 90 Hz AM The aircraft's navigation system measures the Difference in Depth of Modulation (DDM), which increases as the aircraft deviates from the centerline. By analyzing which lobe has the stronger modulation, the system can determine whether the aircraft is left or right of the ILS reference line.

18. What is a GS ?
The Glide Slope (GS) is the ILS component responsible for providing vertical guidance. It is typically located on one side of the runway, abeam the touchdown zone. Like the Localizer, the GS emits two overlapping lobe-shaped signals, with the midpoint defining the glide slope the ideal vertical descent path. The standard glide slope angle is 3°, unless terrain or obstacles along the approach path require an adjusted angle. Both lobes are transmitted on the same UHF frequency, but with different amplitude modulations : - Upper lobe: 90 Hz - Lower lobe: 150 Hz As with the LOC, the aircraft’s navigation system measures the Difference in Depth of Modulation (DDM), which increases with vertical deviation from the glide slope. By analyzing which lobe has the stronger signal, the system can determine whether the aircraft is above or below the glide slope.

19. What is the distance information provided during ILS APPR ?
Distance information during ILS procedures may be provided via markers as follows : [table 0.0.0.6] Range information during ILS APPRs may also be provided via : - ILS/DME facility (if used DME Range shall be specified on the chart) - Locator Marker Beacon (it consists of a low-powered NDB known as LCTR or as LOM/LMM with a maximum range of 10-25NM) - Back Course Marker Beacon (locares at the FAF and activates a white light on the audio panel with a faster rate than the IM

20. What are the ILS protection zones ?
Because of the fact that a slight disturbance of the ILS signal can have significant implications ILS installations are protected by the following zones : - ILS Critical Area : Area where vehicles including aircrafts are excluded during all ILS operations - ILS Sensitive Area : Area where parking or movement of vehicles including aircrafts is controlled to prevent the possibility of unacceptable interference during ILS operations

21. How ILS installations are monitored ?
ILS installations are able to automatically monitor their transmitters in order to detect any shift in mean course line or reduction of strength to prevent ILS operations to be conducted with poor system parameters. The system will either alert or shutdown under the following circumstances : [table 0.0.0.10] The system will also alert if the signal power reduces by more than 50% for single frequency facilities or 80% for dual frequency facilities. For systems certified for ILS CAT II and CAT III if any of those deviations are encountered those systems have the capacity of reverting to lower ILS CAT rather than shutting down completely.

22. What is the principle of operation of GPS ?
GPS system uses a constellation of 24SVs in order to provide position, velocity and time data using the WGS-84 ellipsoid as datum. Within the system we consider three major segments : - Space segment - Control segment - User segment There are currently 4 GNSS systems in use worldwide, NAVSTAR/GPS (USA), GLONASS (Russia), GALILEO (EU) and BEIDOU (China). Each of those systems are based on their own reference datum but due to agreements those systems are compatible and interoperable by any approved user.

23. What is the space segment ?
The space segment refers to the SVs orbiting the Earth, at least 4 NAVSTAR/GPS are observable at any time from any point on Earth’s surface. Those SVs orbiting provide the code signals referenced to GPS time using atomic clocks, these signals are used to obtain : - Identification - Timing - Ranging - Navigation

24. What is the control segment ?
The control segment contains the following elements : - MCS, Master Control Station - Ground antennas - Monitoring stations The principal task of this segment is to monitor the status of the constellation but also to correct orbital parameters as well as uploading navigation data. These tasks are executed by the monitoring station that are passively monitoring and then the MCS estimates SVs errors as well as clock errors and uploads it for transmissions in navigation messages.

25. What is the user segment ?
This segment is the last one of the process and consists of supplying navigational and other data to the end-users, this data includes : - a 2D or 3D position fix - speed data - a precise time reference; The receiver is able to determine its distance to the satellite by measuring the time difference between transmission and reception of the signal. Because the receiver does this for each and every satellite it creates a sphere of possible positions and as more sphere are being determined the more accurate the position fix becomes. One should remember that the initial distance calculated to an SV is a pseudo range because of a slight error of tie between receiver and the SV.

26. What are the type of errors affecting GNSS accuracy ?
GNSS systems are affected by accuracy error such as : - IPD, Ionospheric Propagation Delay - This error is the source of the most significant errors due to the signals being refracted as they pass through the ionosphere. - DoP, Dilution of Precision - This error is caused by poor triangulation of the lines of position when the angle between SVs is relatively small. - Satellite Clock Error - SVs are checked every 12hrs but corrections may be necessary and is found in the NAV MSGs. - Ephemeris Error - This error is caused by the gravitational effect of the Sun and the Moon as well as solar wind or flares that occur. Corrections are sent every 2hrs. - Multi-path reception - Tropospheric Propagation Error - This error is caused by variations in atmospheric pressure, temperature, density, humidity,… affecting the speed of the signal. - Receiver Noise - Aircraft Manoeuvers (line of sight obscurtion)

27. What is the UERE ?
UERE stands for User Equivalent Range Error, it allows for an estimation of position accuracy to be made accounting computed from all the possible errors. [table 0.0.0.16]

28. What is ABAS ?
ABAS, Stands for Aircraft Based Augmentation System, consists of using redundant elements within the constellations or a combination of measurement to build integrity control. ABAS defines the two following methods : - AAIM, Aircraft Autonomous Integrity Monitoring - In this method the GNSS receivers are integrated with the aircraft’s avionics and their signals are integrated with other navigation sensors used to cross-check the GNSS Data validity. - RAIM, Receiver Autonomous Integrity Monitoring - In this method only GNSS data is used, integrity is ensured by redundant measurements and multiple consistency checks in order to obtain a degree of integrity Within the RAIM method we can find 2 different standards : - Basic RAIM, this only provides fault detection (FD) - Enhanced RAIM, this provides fault detection and exclusion (FDE)

29. What is GBAS ?
GBAS, stands for Ground Based Augmentation System but may also be referred as LAAS (Local Area Augmentation System) or LADGPS (Local Area Differential GPS), this system uses surveyed ground stations to provide a level of integrity. Each ground station receives the signal from the SVs and compute its position but because they already know their position they are able to compare the data they receive to their real position and the difference between the two values is the GNSS system error. Then reference stations transmit the correction and level of integrity on VDB (VHF Data Broadcast) on ILS/VOR frequencies. GBAS systems are able to provide the following services : - Positioning service - Precision Approach service (GLS) (GRAS) - Ground Regional Augmentation System

30. What is SBAS ?
SBAS, stands for Satellite Based Augmentation System and may also be referred as WAAS (Wide Area Augmentation System) Or as WADGPS (Wide Area Differential GPS). This system also uses surveyed ground stations to measure position errors in the signals received, the station sends them back to the regional geostationary navigation satellites and finally these re-transmit the data to the aircraft receivers. The SBAS system is able to alert users within 6’ of any GPS malfunction. SBAS operates similarly to the GBAS system but it covers a larger geographical area and SBAS transmits using a geostationary SV and not via a ground station directly. We can encounter 4 NAVSTAR/GPS compatible WADGPS systems : - EGNOS, European Geostationary Navigation Overlay System (EU) - WAAS, Wide Area Augmentation System (US) - MSAS, Multi-function Transport Satellite Augmentation System (JAPAN) - GAGAN, Geo and GPS Augmented Navigation (INDIA) - SDCM, System for Differential Corrections and Monitoring (RUSSIA) All of these systems are compatible and interoperable as they obey to common global standards;

31. How does the EGNOS system works ?
The EGNOS system is a SBAS system provided by Europe and comprises three segments : - Space Segment - It uses NAVSTAR/GPS and GLONASS constellations and 3 geostationary satellites. - Ground Segment - It comprises 4 MCC (Master Control Centers), 6 RCS (Regional Control Centers) and 34 RS (Reference Stations) - User Segment Within the EGNOS system the RS are used to calculate the difference between computed and surveyed positions in order to transmit the errors to the RCS that calculates the differential corrections and these along with integrity information are passed to the MCC that passes the message to the « geostationary SVs; The SVs then broadcast the data over to the users. EGNOS improves the accuracy up to 1-2 m horizontally and 3-5 m vertically. It also improves safety and integrity monitor as it is able to alert users of GPS malfunction within 6’ while NAVSTAR/GPS can take up to 3hrs.

32. How does the GLS system works ?
GLS stands for GBAS Landing System, it consists of a ground station providing approach data to aircraft’s as well as correction and integrity data for GNSS SVs in view via VDB. It has an accuracy up to 1m horizontally and vertically provided that the aircraft is appropriately equipped and only one GLS system has 48 channels and is able to provide precision approaches to each runways of an airport. The system transmits the FAS DB (Final Approach Segment Data Block), it contains precise lateral and vertical parameters with a redundancy check to ensure integrity of the approach data sent. If the redundancy check is negative the équipement will prevent the activation of the associated approach procedure as well as the detection of an error in the satellite position or loss of satellite data.

33. What is the GLS minimum service area ?
GLS coverage resembles the one of an ILS, the minimum service area is : - +- 35° of the approach path nominal centerline within 15 NM - +- 10° of the approach path extended centerline within 15-20 NM

34. What is the principle of RNAV ?
RNAV stands for Area Navigation, it’s a navigation technique used in order to navigate from A to B without having to overfly ground-based radio aids it has several benefits such as shorter routes can be used, pre-programmed arrival or departures and the development of certain instrument approaches. Area navigation uses the following range of sensors : - Radio Aids (VOR/DME/…) - Navigation Systems (IRS/INS/…)

35. What is the principle of PBN ?
PBN stands for Performance Based Navigation, it was initiated by ICAO in order to standardize terminology and specifications regarding RNAV and RNP principles as in the early days little difference existed between these concepts. Unlike conventional navigation PBN is not sensor-specific and provide the following avantages : - Route and procedures are not relying on ground équipement - Route and procedures are more flexible and efficient - Navigation management is also much simpler. Performance requirements for PBN are described as : - Accuracy - Integrity - Continuity - Availability - Functionality

36. What are the components of PBN ?
Within the Navigation part of PBN regarding the airspace concept it sits on the 3 components of PBN: - Navigation Applications, meaning the practical implementation of specifications supported by the navaid infrastructure. - Navigation Specifications, provided by ICAO for the use of member states whishing to construct a new route or procedure. - NAVAID Infrastructure, It comprises the Space and/or the ground-based navaids required to execute the PBN operations.

37. What is the content of a navigation specification ?
A Navigation Specification Contains the following elements : - Approval Process, usually the aircraft manufacturer and it states the responsibilities of the state and the operator for manuals, operating procedures, crew training, MEL,… - Aircraft Requirement, regards the technical and performance requirements that must be met by the aircraft and its systems including the type of information that must be displayed for the flight crew. - Operating Procedures, it covers the requirements for pre-flight planning, ABAS Availability and general operating procedures. - Pilot knowledge and training, theoretical and practical training that must be given to the flight crew in order to give them the approval for operation. - Navigation Database, refers to the requirement of having a NAV DB from an approved supplier ensuring periodic data checks. - Oversight of Operators, covers the responsibilities of the states to oint or nav errors and implement corrective actions.

38. What are the specifications of RNAV 10 ?
What are the specifications of RNAV 10 ?

39. What are the specifications of RNAV 5 ?
RNAV 5 is to be indicated in the State’s AIP along with the equipment requirements for the specific airspace or designated routes based upon the WGS-84 coordinates. The available NAVAID shall be clearly depicted on the charts with the gross error checking.

40. What are the specifications of RNAV/RNP 2 and 1 ?
RNAV/RNP 2 and 1 is to be used for SIDs and STARs and they shall be flown unless the following criterias can be met : - Procedures are retrievable by name from an on-board database - Procedures are conform the charted routes These routes can only be modified in response to an ATC clearance by waypoint insertion from the database or by deleting waypoints. Manual creation of waypoint is prohibited.

41. What are the type of PBN Approaches ?
As we know ICAO Annex 6 sets 3 general Approach categories such as NPAs, APVs and PAs. We use two navigation specifications for the approach phase : - RNP APCH, for straight-in type approaches - RNP AR APCH, for FAS with a curving lateral tracks We can regroup PBN approaches in two categories : - Lateral Guidance only, includes LNAV and LP - With Vertical Guidance, includes LNAV/VNAV and LPV For LNAV and LNAV/VNAV procedures they use on-board equipment in order to provide lateral and vertical linear guidance. For LP and LPV they also use on-board equipment but unlike the previous approach they provide angular guidance on the lateral and vertical planes. In the Vertical plane it is to be considered that for LNAV/VNAV approaches the value used as reference is the barometric altitude while for the LPV procedure it uses geometric altitude because this procedure is based on SBAS GNSS.

42. What are the RNP AR APCH ?
RP AR APCH navigation specification stands for Authorisation Required, this is because the principal différence is that this procedure includes a curving FAS. Compared to « normal » RNP APCH these have a reduced lateral and vertical obstacle clearance usually due to high ground on the approach. However the last part of the FAS from no later than the FROP (Final Approach Roll-Out Point) is always flown straight-in. Procedures including a RF leg in the FAS shall establish a FROP respecting the following : - 150m (492’) above the landing threshold elevation - 15’’ where the MAP is based on RNP 1.0 - 50’’ where the MAP is based on RNP 1.0 or RNAV APCH

43. Types of Radio Wave propagation
Radio waves are categorized depending on how they propagate : Space Waves → They propagate through the air directly from Tx to Rx, they are limited in range as they require line-of-sight between Tx/Rx and they are not reflected by the ionosphere. Their primary limiting factor is Earth’s curvature and terrain. This means of propagation is usually of higher frequencies (VHF, UHF, SHF, EHF). Sky Waves → They are created due to the refraction within the E and F layer of the ionosphere. This process allows very long distances to be achieved if the transmission power is sufficient. This usually affects lower frequencies as higher frequency causes the diffraction to decrease. Ground (Surface) Waves → They travel along Earth’s surface and the ionosphere allowing them to propagate along a considerable distance. Those waves are usually composed of a surface wave, a direct space wave and an indirect space wave (reflected). This means of propagation is usually of lower frequencies (VLF, LF, MF, HF).

44. Factors affecting radio waves propagation
Radio wave propagation is affected by multiple factors that may cause signal weakening or blockage : Antenna Shadowing → It occurs when the line-of-sight between Tx and Rx antennas is either partially or fully blocked by terrain, building,... as a result the antenna collects less radiation. Reflection → It occurs when the radio wave reflects off a surface such as terrain, buildings, water droplets,... it may cause a degradation of the signal’s quality. Refraction → It refers to the change in direction of the radio wave due to changes in propagation speed and wavelengths. This is the principle used for sky waves. Diffraction → It occurs when a radio passes around or through an obstacle causing a diffraction if the obstacle is bigger than the wavelength of the wave. This îs the principle used for ground waves. Multipath Propagation → It may occur when a signal is reflected from surfaces and arrives at the receiver via more than one path involving changes in both directions of the signal and the path causing navigational anomalies in some equipment. Absorption → It refers to the matter absorbing radio wave energy changing it into heat for exemple and causing the wave to be attenuated. Attenuation → It consists of the weakening or cancellation of the radio signal. Superposition and Interference → It refers to two or more signals with similar carrier waves interfering with each other which may produce noise or cancelling the radio signal. Fading → Is a random process affecting radio waves and can be due to multipath propagation, weather or shadowing.

45. NDB Principle of Operation
The NDB is a ground based radio station transmitting an omnidirectional radio wave. The system comprises : - NDB Ground Transmitters - ADF Receiver and display equipment NDB are progressively disappearing but may still be used for Enroute navigation, Instrument Approach Procedure or Identifying a position along a track. We consider two main types of NDB : NDB, with a range of +50 NM for enroute navigation or instrument approaches LOCATOR (LCTR), with a range of 10-25 NM used only for instrument approaches The NDBs operate in the LF and MF frequency bands between 190-1750 kHz. The transmission's main means of propagation is Ground Wave. Ech NDB is uniquely identified with 2-3 letters transmitted in Morse Code either in a Continuous Wave requiring a Beat Frequency Oscillator (BFO) or in a Modulated Continuous Wave Amplitude Modulated (AM). The aircraft equipment uses a directional aerial to sense the direction of the signal and thus the NDB. On the display pilots are able to read QDM (needle head) and QDR (needle tail). NDB Ground Stations are monitored and usually comprises a active and a stand-by transmitter that become active when the system goes outside of the following defined parameters : Radiated Carrier Power decreasing more than 50% Failure to transmit the IDENT signal Malfunction or failure of the self-monitoring equipment

46. VOR Principle of Operation
The VOR system is also a ground based navigation aid orientated towards magnetic North comprising : - VOR Ground Transmitters - Airborne Receiving equipment (antenna and VHF NAV Receiver unit) and display VORs operate in the VHF frequency band from 108.000 to 117.975 MHz with a 50 kH (0,05 MHz) frequency separation. The lower part of this band is shared with ILS from 108.000 to 111.975 MHz, within this band frequencies with an odd decimal are dedicated to ILS. VORs are identified by their own 3 letter morse identification code. We consider two main types of VORs stations : - CVOR, Conventional : 1st gen system used for terminal and enroute navigation, antennas are physically rotated. - DVOR, Doppler : 2nd gen system used for enroute IFR and terminal navigation, antennas are digitally rotated. Within VORs stations we observe different categories as High altitude (H), Low altitude (L) or Terminal (T) and the following type of operations : - Enroute VOR - TVOR Terminal - VOT Test - BVOR Broadcast VOR operations rely on the transmission of 2 independent signals on the same frequency, a Reference Phase signal (RP), and a Variable Phase signal (VP). Both signals are received by the aircraft receiver at different time/phase, the phase difference allows the definition of the radial on which the receiver is located. VOR Ground Stations are also monitored by a ground-based test unit that ensures the following parameters are met : - Bearing information remains within 1° - Signal strength is not less than 85% - Monitoring system is working

47. DME Principle of Operation
The DME system is ground based and usually paired with other navaids such as VORs, ILS and NDB. It displays the slant range between the aircraft and the station. The system comprises : - Airborne equipment : Interrogator - Ground equipment : Transponder DME stations operate within the UHF frequency band, but using two frequencies separated by 63 MHz, one for the interrogation signal and the other for the reply. However this system has a limited capacity of approximately 100 aircrafts, the 100 strongest signals are answered by the station. DMEs stations are identified by a 3 letter morse code transmitted once every 40s, if a VOR is associated the VOR ident is transmitted 3x and the DME ident x1 at a higher frequency. We can consider 3 categories of DMEs : - DME/N, Standard DME ranging up to 200NM with +- 0,25 nm / +1,25 of Range - DME/P, Precision DME used for MLS operations - Terminal DME, Collocated with other navaids and provides a 0 reading at the touchdown point - TACAN, military UFH tactical aid to navigation providing bearing + distance As mentioned above DME provides Slant Range taking into account the aircraft height causing the reading to be greater than the actual ground distance the aircraft is from the station. This difference increases with the distance and the height of the aircraft, the closer the aircraft the greater the difference. Ground Range=(slant range)² + (height)² Navigation with DMEs : - Rho-Rho fix, combines two DME arcs of specified distances. - Rho-Theta, combines a specific DME distance with a specific VOR radial. - DME Arc, aircrafts are required to maintain a specific distance from the station to fly an arc.

48. Transponder Principle of Operation
A Transponder is a transmitter/receiver device that is used to identify and obtain data from aircraft to display on the ATC Secondary Surveillance Radar. Transponders work on the principle of interrogation and response, first the transponder receives the interrogation signal with a 1030MHz frequency from the ATC SSR and then it answers it by sending a reply signal with a 1090MHz frequency. This allows the ATC to obtain information from the aircraft such as position, altitude, speed,... depending on the transponder functioning mode. There are 3 transponder modes : - Mode A, this mode only transmits the aircraft identification code (4 digits from 0 to 7) - Mode C, this mode transmits the aircraft pressure altitude referenced to 1013.25 hPa in 100’ increments - Mode S, this mode transmits the aircraft’s unique flight address (24-bits ICAO code), flight data, allows TCAS functions and DataLink capacity

49. Types of Approaches
Approaches can be either : - Straight-in A straight-in approach is designed to be aligned with the runway centerline. For non-precision approaches a straight-in is considered acceptable if the angle between the final approach track and the runway centerline is within 30°. - Circling A circling approach is often used in areas where terrain and other constraints cause the final approach track and descent gradient to be outside of a straight-in approach boundaries. Approaches can also be either 2D or 3D and Type A or Type B : - 2D APPR : Approach procedure using only lateral guidance - 3D APPR : Approach procedure using both lateral and vertical guidance - Type A : DH > 75m (250’). - Type B : DH < 75m (250’) .

50. How do you calculate Turn radius?
GS * 0.5%

51. Define: QTE, QUJ, QDR, QDM.
QTE: true bearing of the aircraft from the station. In others words, it´s the geographical position line of the aircraft with respect to the station. QTE = TH + RB +/- 180º QUJ: true bearing from the aircraft to the station, simply put is the true course to reach the station. QUJ = TH + RB QDR: magnetic bearing of the airplane from the station. It´s the magnetic position (Radial), of the aircraft relative to the station. QDR = MH + RB +/- 180º QDM: magnetic bearing of the station from the plane. It´s the magnetic course that the airplane must follow to reach the station. QDM = MH + RB

52. What is the primary principle by which an Automatic Direction Finder (ADF) determines the bearing to a Non-Directional Beacon (NDB)?
Uses an antenna to detect the strongest signal using a rotatable antenna

53. What is the ADF error caused by the airframe distorting the electromagnetic field, leading to inaccurate bearings, particularly when the aircraft is not pointing directly at or away from the NDB?
Quadrantal error; It's specifically caused by the metallic airframe bending the radio waves.

54. What are the main components of an ADF?
Antenna Receiver Indicator

55. In what frequency range do NDBs operate?
Low to medium frequency (LF/MF) Typically, between 190 to 1750 KHz

56. What is the primary difference between homing and tracking using an ADF?
Homing involves flying directly to the station. You just follow the needle to the station Tracking involves flying a constant track over the ground. You also have to adjust for wind

57. The night effect associated with NDBs is primarily caused by:
The reflection of the skywaves off the ionosphere causing signal fluctuations Lower frequency waves are absorbed during the day by the ionization of the d layer, but during the night it dissipates, and the radio waves may be reflected, sending mixed signals to the adf, causing it to swing.

58. There is a big downside to the use of adf when compared to other navaids like vor, especially during tough weather like thunderstorms, what is it and why does it happen?
During Thunderstorms or storms with high static charges, erratic and unreliable needle indications will occur, caused by electrical discharges that create electromagnetic interference with the ndb, this navaid to be unprecise and very unreliable since the needle will be erratic.

59. What is the full scale deflection of the VOR?
10 degrees

60. How does a VOR station determines an aircraft's bearing?
A VOR transmits two signals: o A reference signal with constant phase in all directions o A variable signal with a changing phase according to the azimuth The aircraft receiver simply measures the phase difference to determine its bearing from the station

61. In what frequency band do VOR stations operate?
VHF (108MHz 117.95 MHz)

62. What is the function of the Omni Bearing Selector (OBS) on a VOR indicator?
To rotate the course arrow to select the desried radial to or From the VOR station

63. The cone of confusion is:
rily lose the ability to get bearings. The change from TO/FROM will occur around here.

64. A DME typically operates at UHF frequencies, so why is it usually paired with VORs?
The DME is paired automatically when you tune the VOR. The equipment/avionics knows that when that frequency is tuned it also has an associated UHF frequency which is the DME. Older aircraft required manual tuning, but nowadays the equipment searches automatically.

65. What type of range is given by a DME?
Slant range, which is line of sight range, so depending on altitude the real range might be lower than the displayer on the DME.

66. How do you correct for time in a holding?
It is apllied only to timing holdings The correction is made in the outbound leg The first method is to reduce or add 2 seconds for each knot of headwing or tailwind. The second method is to reduce or add half the missed time to complete the holding on the outbound leg.

67. How do you correct for the wind in a holding?
The recommended method to correct the wind is to use the double or triple correction angle (WCA). So with a crosswind of 6 kts you have 4º of WCA (6x2/3=4) you double this value to 8º and you correct it on the outbound leg. You can also use triple correction, in which case you'd change to 12° but sometimes it'll be too much, others just enough.

68. What is the purpose of RAIM?
RAIM means receiver autonomous integrity monitoring and it's a system that ensure the integrity of the GPS signals. In short, it tells us if the GPS signal isn't as precise as it should be which is important mostly during RNAV approaches.

69. The instrument approach procedures (IAP) are:
Non precision approach (NPA): 2D type A. NDB, VOR, VOR/DME, LOC, LNAV Approach procedure with vertical guidance (APV): 3D PBN type A. LNAV/VNAV, LPV. Precision Approach (PA): 3D type A or B. ILS.

70. What is a circling approach?
An extension of an instrument approach procedure which provides for visual circling of the aerodrome prior to landing.

71. What are the errors that NDB is susceptible to?
- Absence of warning indication. - Static from cumulonimbus clouds. - Coastal refraction. - Night/twilight effect: Skywaves cause bearing errors and station interference. - Mountain waves: Multipath propagation and weakening of signals. - Dip error: Needle dips towards the down-going wing in a turn.

72. What errors is GNSS subjected to?
- Satellite clock error; - Ephemeris error; - Tropospheric propagation error; - Receiver noise; - Multi-path reception; - Aircraft manoeuvres; - Geometric dilution of precision (GDoP).

73. What are the 3 major methods for accuracy augmentation of differential GPS (DGPS)?
- Airborne-Based Augmentation System (ABAS); - Ground-Based Augmentation System (GBAS); - Satellite-Based Augmentation System (SBAS).

74. What is the accuracy of a VOR providing track guidance?
The accuracy of a VOR providing track guidance is ±5.2º.


G1000
1. What are the requirements for an automatic change of GPS to LOC in the G1000?
-LOC or ILS approach has been loaded into the active flight plan. -FAF is the active leg and the FAF is less than 15 NM away. -Valid LOC frequency has been tuned. -GPS CDI deviation is less than 1.2 times full-scale deflection.

2. What is the automatic CDI full-scale deflection during the Terminal flight phase?
1NM.

3. What is the automatic CDI full-scale deflection during the Enroute flight phase?
2NM.

4. When does the Terminal phase switches to Enroute phase?
At 30 NM from the departure airport, the enroute phase is automatically entered and the CDI scaling changes from 1.0 NM to 2.0 NM over a distance of 1.0 NM.

5. What does the yellow terrain shown on the MFD screen indicate?
It means terrain between 100ft and 1000ft bellow the aircraft altitude.

6. What does the red terrain shown on the MFD screen indicate?
It means terrain above or within 100ft bellow the aircraft altitude.

7. What are the principal components of the G1000 system and their functions ?
The G1000 system is an integrated flight control system presenting flight instrumentation, position, navigation, communication and identification information to the pilots. The system consists of several LRUs (Line Replaceable Units) : - GDU 1040 - Garmin Display Unit, it’s the LCD display used to display all of the information to the pilots. Each display communicates with each other via a HSDB Ethernet connection. - GMA 1347 - Garmin , it integrates NAV/COM digital audio with interphone system and marker beacons. It also controls the manual display reversionary mode. - GDC 74A, it is used to process data from the pitot/static system as well as the OAT probe in order to provide pressure altitude, vertical speed, airspeed and OAT information. - GRS 77 - Garmin , it provides aircraft attitude and heading data via ARINC 429. It contains advanced sensors (accelerometers, rate sensors,…) and communicates with other LRUs to obtain magnetic field, air data and GPS information. - GMU 44, used to provide local magnetic field data in order to perceive the aircraft magnetic heading. - GIA 63, functions as the main communication hub linking all the LRUs to the PFD. They contain a GPS receiver, VHF COM/NAV/GS receivers, FD, microprocessors. GIAs are paired but they do not communicate with each other. - GTX 33, it’s a solid-state Mode S Transponder providing Mode A,C and S operation controlled via the PFD. - GEA 71, it receives and processes data from the engine and airframe sensors

8. What is the G1000 system architecture ?
As we saw before the G1000 system is organized around several LRUs with different roles. The architecture and how the different LRUs interact is as follows for a basic G1000 system. First we have the PFD and the MFD (GDU 1040), they communicate directly with each Integrated Avionics Unit (GIA 63). Each GIA is sending data to either the PFD or the MFD and even if they are paired they do not share data with each other. Both the GIAs are linked with the Air Data Computer and the AHRS and indirectly with the Magnetometer to obtain and share data such as OAT, Airspeed, Alt, VS, Attitude, Rate of turn, Coordination and Heading. The GDC 74A and GRS 77 are also connected directly with the PFD and MFD in order to display this data to the pilot. Finally, each GIA is linked and shares data with the Transponder, the Engine/Airframe Unit and the Auto Pilot if equipped.

9. What is the reversionary display operation ?
If a display failure occurs the G1000 system automatically switches to reversionary mode, in this mode all of the important flight information is displayed on the remaining functional display in the same way as in the normal operating mode. When a display fails the relevant IAU Ethernet interface is cut off in a way that the IAU can’t communicate with the remaining display, also the COM/NAV functions provided by the failed IAU are flagged on the functional display. For the AHRS, ADC, Engine/Airframe Unit and the Transponder are also reverting to backup path without the need of any pilot action as this is automated for all LRUs. Whenever the system fails to identify a display problem, reversionary mode may be manually activated via the Audio Panel DISPLAY BACKUP button. It can also be deactivated by pressing this button a second time.

10. What are the failures associated with the AHRS operation ?
As previously stated the AHRS is responsible for providing attitude, heading and vertical accelerations, in order to do so it uses data from the GPS, magnetometer and air data alongside its internal sensors. Whenever one of these sources is lost it’s communicated to the pilot by advisory alert messages, if the failure comes from the AHRS internal sensorsIt will result in a loss of attitude and heading information. Types of failures : - GPS Input Failure : In normal operation two GPS input are provided, if GPS information from one input fails the AHRS will use the remaining input and inform the pilot; However if both inputs fail the AHRS can continue to provide data to the PFD as long as the magnetometer and airspeed data are available. - Magnetometer Failure : If this input fails the AHRS still provides attitude information however the heading output will be flagged. - Air Data Input Failure : If there is an Air Data failure data is not affected as long as the GPS input is still valid. Invalid airspeed and GPS data will result in a loss of all attitude and heading.

11. What are the abnormal GPS conditions ?
[table 0.0.0.43] DR mode causes the following data to be shown in yellow when GPS was selected during ENR or OCN phase : - CDI (removed after 20’) - Current TRK bug - Wind Data - DIST in the bearing information window - GPS bearing pointers - GS

12. How does auto-tuning NAV frequencies work ?
NAV frequencies are automatically entered in the NAV box on approach activation, for VOR/ILS the frequency is automatically transferred as follow : - If the CDI source is GPS, the approach frequency is set to NAV1 active with the previous frequency going to NAV1 standby. - If the CDI source is GPS and the NAV1standby frequency is the approach frequency it is transferred to active. - If the CDI source is NAV1 or NAV2 the approach frequency is set on the standby field of the selected NAV source. When an ILS/LOC APPR is activated while navigating by GPS the system will automatically switch to LOC when the final approach course is intercepted within 15 NM from the FAF.

13. How does the G1000 RAIM check work ?
RAIM is a GPS function that performs a check on tracked satellites to ensure the available satellite geometry allows the GPS receiver to calculate a position within the defined protection limit. RAIM is able to predict satellite coverage within +- 15’ of the specified arrival time and date. If RAIM is not available for the final approach course the approach will not become active, if RAIM is not available when crossing the FAF the MAPR must be flown. We can encounter 4 RAIM status as follow : - COMPUTE RAIM, RAIM has not been computed - COMPUTING AVAILABILITY, RAIM is being computed - RAIM AVAILABLE, RAIM is predicted to be available - RAIM NOT AVAILABLE, RAIM is predicted to be unavailable

14. What is the Dead Reckoning mode ?
DR mode is only functional during ENR or OCN flight phases, in all of the other phase a GPS malfunction will be indicated to the pilot by a « NO GPS POSITION » message on the map and the G1000 will stop using GPS. In DR mode the system will use the last known position combined with updated airspeed and heading data when available in order to calculate and display the aircraft current estimated position. However one must keep in mind that this estimated position is increasingly unreliable over time and other means of navigation must be used. If for some reason airspeed and heading data is unavailable the system may display a path completely different that the one the aircraft is flying, so estimated position in DR without airspeed and heading information must not be used for navigation purposes.

15. How does terrain proximity works ?
The G1000 has a terrain proximity system and it must not be confused with a Terrain awareness system as the G1000 system only serves to enhance terrain awareness and does not provide warning announcements. Terrain Proximity requires the following : - Valid 3D GPS position - Valid Terrain/Obstacles database The system displays altitudes of terrain and obstacles relative to the aircraft altitude and position from the database. However as errors or obstacles not in the database this shall not be used to navigate around terrain. The reference for the system is the GLS (height above geodetic sea level) converted from the GPS altitude that along with the GPS position serves to display a 2D picture of the surrounding terrain and obstacles around the aircraft’s position but also around its flight path. terrain and obstacles are display following a colour coding : - RED, terrain or obstacle above or within 100’ below the aircraft’s altitude. - YELLOW, terrain or obstacle between 100’ and 1000’ below the aircraft’s altitude. - BLACK, terrain or obstacle more than 1000’ below the aircraft’s altitude. Terrain can be displayed on the navigation map along with the flight plan but it can also be displayed in a profile view with VNAV indications along a certain width from the current aircraft track as follow : - Approach, 0.6 NM - Departure, 0.6 NM - Terminal, 2.0 NM - En Route, 4.0 NM - Oceanic, 4.0 NM

16. How does traffic information service works ?
The TIS service is only provided for advisory use, TIS is only available when the aircraft is within the service volume of a TIS capable terminal radar. One must keep in mind that aircraft without an operating transponder are invisible to both TAS and TIS. TIS uses Mode S transponder for the traffic datalink and it also uses information from ground stations every 5’’. The G1000 system can display up to 8 traffic targets within a 7.5 NM radius from 3000’ below to 3500’ above the requesting aircraft altitude, the following symbols are used : - Black and white diamond, Non-Threat traffic - Yellow sphere, Traffic Advisory - Yellow and grey sphere, Traffic Advisory off scale TIS also provides the crew with a vector line showing the direction in which the traffic is moving to the nearest 45°. If the TIS is unable to determine the bearing of the traffic a message is displayed in the center of the traffic map page (non-bearing traffic). The altitude difference between the aircraft’s is displayed in above or below the traffic symbol in hundreds of feet, altitude trend is also displayed by an arrow for VS greater than 500 fpm in either directions to the right of the aircraft symbol. If the traffic is an aircraft without altitude reporting capability appear without altitude or ROC/ROD information

17. What are the G1000 alert levels ?
The G1000 systems alerting system uses three alter levels as follows : - WARNING, this requires immediate pilot attention; it's displayed in the annunciations window along with a continuous aural tone. Also a warning soft key is present, by pressing it the pilot acknowledges the warning alert and stops the aural tone. - CAUTION, this indicates an abnormal situation that may require pilot action, it’s displayed in the annunciations window along with a single aural tone. Also a warning soft key is present, by pressing it the pilot acknowledges the caution alert. - MESSAGE ADVISORY, this provides general information to the pilot, it does not issue annunciations instead it displays an advisory soft key annunciation. Pressing it acknowledges the message and opens the alert message in the alerts window.

18. What are the G1000 Warning and Caution alerts ?
For NAV III aircrafts the warning and caution alerts are the following : [table 0.0.0.50]~

19. What are the G1000 aural alerts ?
Voice alerts for the G1000 system are provided by the GIA 63, one must keep in mind that if this unit fails audio and voice alert are no longer available. In normal operations the following aural alert can occur : [table 0.0.0.51]

20. What are the G1000 system annunciations ?
In the event of a LRU failure or a LRU function failure a red X typically appears on the window associated with that data failure. The following system failure annunciations can be encountered : [table 0.0.0.52]

21. When does turn anticipation begin ?
The G1000 smooths legs transitions based on a normal 15° bank ange with the ability to roll up to 30°, it also provides three cues for the pilot : - Waypoint alert, this alert appears on the PFD 10’’ before the turn point - Flashing turn advisory, message is displayed when the pilot starts the turn and the HSI GPS mode automatically sequence the next DTK or HDG value. - HSI TO/FROM, indicator flips momentarily to indicate that the midpoint of the turn has been crossed.

22. What is the purpose of the standby battery in the G1000 system ?
The G1000 system is equipped with a 24V standby battery that serves as a critical backup in case of an electrical failure. During normal operation this battery is charged by the primary electrical system however if the main bus voltage drops below 20V or if the alternator and main battery fail or are turned off, the standby battery will automatically power the essential bus for at least 30’. By doing so it keeps the following systems operational : - PFD - ADC/AHRS - Engine/Airframe Monitoring - COM1/NAV1 - Standby Instruments lighting.

23. How does a GIA failure affect the G1000 system ?
GIAs are, as previously mentioned, central integrated avionics LRUs performing multiple roles such as data processing and distribution (GPS receiver, VHF COM/NAV, interface for AHRS/ADC/XPDR/FD). Both GIAs are not connected with each other directly but they serve as the main hub to receive information from all the other LRUs in order to interpret this data and display it to the pilot via the associated GDU. If a GIA failure were to be experienced the other GIA would enter in reversionary mode on the PFD/MFD. If a failure of GIA 1 occurs one should expect to lose COM1/NAV1/GPS1 as well as the PFD FPL entry capability. AHRS/ADC data can still be retrieved by the GIA 2 and displayed on the GDU 2 that switched to reversionary mode and serves as PFD. However if a GIA 2 failure occurs one must expect to lose COM2/NAV2/GPS2 but without significant changes to the PFD. If a DUAL GIA failure is experienced a major loss of data happens as both GDU won’t be able to display any information even if the LRUs are still operational. Pilot must rely on the standby instruments as they are the only ones left fully operational.

24. How does a AHRS failure affect the G1000 system ?
AHRS is, as previously mentioned, the attitude and heading reference system of the G1000 system it’s the primary reference to provide aircraft orientation data. In case of an AHRS failure the following data becomes unavailable : - Attitude, - Heading, - Turn coordination, In this event G1000 will still attempt a partial recovery of this data in order for the pilot to be able to maintain partial situational awareness. The G1000 will attempt to reconstruct basic attitude information based on the GOS and ADC data (TRK, GS, ALT, VS,…) however this information is not as accurate as the AHRS data and should be used only for reference in an emergency.

25. How does a ADC failure affect the G1000 system ?
ADC is, as previously mentioned, the hub for pitot-static and OAT data, in the event of a ADC failure the G1000 will lose the following data : - Airspeed and TAS - Altitude - Vertical Speed - OAT However the maintains attitude and GPS derived information (GS, TRK, ALT,…) and must rely on the standby instruments to obtain air data.

26. What is the difference between a Direct-to and Activate Leg ?
Direct-to serves to navigate directly to a waypoint from the present aircraft position bypassing the planned route. Activate Leg serves to resume/force the system to navigate along a specific leg of the flight plan inserted; it may be used to skip ahead, rejoin a route or manually activate the next leg if it does not automatically activate. [table 0.0.0.58]


C172S
1. What is the C172S electrical system ?
The C172S electrical system is 28V DC with a 60 amp belt-driven alternator as well as a 24V battery. Power is supplied to the system via 2 primary buses (ELECTRICAL BUS 1/2) along with an essential bus and a cross-feed bus. The buses are used to provide energy to the following éléments : - Electrical Bus 1 (Fuel pump, BCN, LAND, CAB PWR, FLAPS) - Electrical Bus 2 (PITOT HT, NAV, TAXI, STROBES, Panel) - Essential Bus (PFD, ADC, AHRS, NAV1, COM1, STBY IND LTS, STBY BAT) - Avionics Bus 1 (PFD, ADC, AHRS, NAV 1, FIS, ADF, DME) - Avionics Bus 2 (MFD, XPDR, NAV2, COM2, AUDIO, A/P) Within the system the following values are measured : - Voltage, for the main bus at the WARN CB and essential bus at the NAV1 ENG CB - Current, between the battery and alternator relays,

2. How many antennas are on the C172S and their uses ?
On the C172S we can encounter 7 antennas as follow : - 2 VHF COM/GPS mounted on the top of the cabin, - Blade type NAV antenna on either side of the tailcone for VOR/GS, - Marker beacon antenna on the bottom of the tailcone, - Transponder antenna on the bottom of the cabin - DME antenna on the tailcone if equipped


UNCATEGORIZED
1. How do you calculate your TOD?


2. How do you monitor your continuous descent?



